to >; ro f=

w<OU 168892 >m

^ CD -< CO



The
Oxford Book
Of English Prose



OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS

AMEN HOUSE, EC 4
London Edinburgh Glasgow New York
Toronto Melbourne Capetown Bombay
Calcutta Madras
HUMPHREY MILFORD

PUBLISHER TO THE
UNIVERSITY



First Published 1925
Reprinted 1926, 1930, 1940



The
Oxford Book
Of English Prose

Chosen & Edited by

Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch



Oxford
At the Clarendon Press



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN AT THE UNIVKRS1TV PRESS, OXFORD
BY JOHN JOHNSON, PRINTER TO THE UNIVER.MTy



TO

TWO HOUSES
OF LEARNING AND HOSPITALITY

TRINITY COLLEGE, OXFORD

AND

JESUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE

AND TO

FRIENDSHIP



PREFACE



IT will hardly allure a ' hesitating purchaser *
of this book that I open it with a query if it
be possible to make a Prose Anthology at
all. This doubt I confess has more than once
assailed me in the years spent on the attempt.
But to be brave is the only way to succeed, and
I have hope that this volume will at least
establish the possibility.

Yet I must premise that any anthology of
English Prose is — for several reasons and of its
very nature — difficult.

To begin with, if a man seek to the sources,
it demands long and laborious reading, the
bulk of our prose being already well-nigh im-
measurable. I have read pretty widely among
the originals for this book, and during five
years for its special purpose. The result leaves
me convinced that no honest scholar can pre-
tend an acquaintance with the whole of English
prose, or even with the whole that may yield
good selections. All one can do is to spread
a wide and patient net and report that he
brings the best of his haul.

Of this labour upon mere bulk, however,
he should despise to complain. It is his

vii



PREFACE

business, once undertaken; and it is not the
inherent difficulty of his undertaking, which the
reader will perhaps most readily understand if
he turn to No. 58 1 of this volume and consider
what Mr. Clutton-Brock says of the essential
qualities by virtue of which Prose differs from
Verse. He hazards that while the cardinal
virtue of Verse is Love, the cardinal virtue of
Prose is Justice. I should put it a little differ-
ently, using other terms. Bearing in mind such
lines as Milton's famous invocation :

Hail holy Light! offspring of Heav'n first-born,
or Macbeth's :

Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,

or Marvell's Ode upon Cromwell's return from
Ireland, or Gray's Elegy, or many a sonnet of
Wordsworth's, I should prefer ' a high com-
pelling emotion 'to Mr. CIutton-BrockV Love ',
however widely interpreted, as the virtue of
Poetry ; and Persuasion rather than Justice as
the first virtue of Prose, whether in narrative
or in argument. Defoe's art in telling of
Crusoe's visits to the wreck is all bent on
persuading you that it really happened and
just so ; as Burke, in pleading for conciliation
with the American colonists, is bent on mar-
shalling argument upon argument why con-
ciliation is expedient besides being just. In

VIII



PREFACE



argument, to be sure, the appeal lies always
towards an assumed seat of absolute justice to
which even in the Law Courts every plea is
addressed; Persuasion is, after all, as Matthew
Arnold says, the only true intellectual process,
or as Socrates, in prison under sentence of death
for having failed in it, so nobly proclaimed,
the only right way of reforming a common-
wealth.

But persuasion, whether in narrative or in
argument, is a long process, insinuating, piling
up proof ; and Prose its medium is therefore
naturally long. So we find ourselves confronted
with the material, almost brutal, question, Can
any anthology of short passages rightly illustrate
an art of which the property is to be long?
From this the Devil's Advocate easily goes on
to say, 4 Prose, being what you allow it to be, on
that admission abhors the purple patch. You
have admitted many purple patches. Please
you, justify yourself.' To this I might answer
that the purple patches in this book are
actually few in comparison with the mass of its
contents : I have very sedulously included all
sorts of our prose, choosing often a passage
quite pedestrian. Yet the answer would not
be quite honest : for some things are here
which all men have applauded, and (frankly)
because they have been so applauded as well



PREFACE

as because my own judgement applauds.
Ralegh on Death, for example, some pages of
Sir Thomas Browne, Lincoln's Gettysburg Ora-
tion. As I wrote in my preface to the Oxford
Book of English Verse, I have tried to choose
the best, and the best is the best though a hun-
dred judges have declared it so.

But I have a bolder word to say for the purple
patch. One might, in servility to a catchword of
criticism, plead that from a sermon of Donne's,
a tract of Milton's, an oration by Chatham or
Burke, one must of necessity take the oilmen,
only referring the reader to the winding ways
up the heights from which like eagles the im-
passioned phrases launch themselves. I think
that, upon examination, literature — which, after
all, is memorable speech — will be found in
practice very much more on the side of the
purple patch than the generality supposes
nowadays. For certain Thucydides sewed on
these patches deliberately : so (I think) did
Plato, albeit more delicately as a philosopher
electing to be a man of the world : so certainly
did Cicero : so as certainly in the line of our
own prose and in their turn did Malory, Donne,
Milton, Browne, Berkeley, De Quincey, Hazlitt
— to pursue no farther. Nay, if we go right
back, it is arguable that Prose was ' born in
the purple ': that nine-tenths of the speech-

X



PREFACE

making in the Iliad itself, for example, is not
poetry at all but rhetoric strung into hexa-
meters; a metre which the tragedians discarded
for iambics, ' the most conversational form of
verse '. Aristotle himself never troubled to
define prose, the medium in which he wrote
as it happened to him. In the Poetics he just
indicates that there is such a thing ; that
hitherto it has lacked a name ; and so (with-
out supplying it) he passes on. He nowhere
separates prose from poetry, though we may
infer a separation. But in the Rhetoric (Book iii)
the philosopher, while (man of science as he
was) suggesting that bald words, such as he
habitually used, are the medium for some
definite and ascertained knowledge, does admit
the existence of a medium persuading men's
opinion; and, while belittling it somewhat,
allows its right to cultivate a-e/xvoriji or — shall
we call it ? — the grand style. The man, after all,
could not escape thewitchery,thenoblecharmof
Plato, his beloved master. Now we may reason-
ably argue, I think, that men's opinions about
things — their speculations, memories, aspira-
tions, glimpses of the unseen and infinite — are
actually of more importance, of more meaning to
mankind than any amount of ascertained fact,
that all ascertained fact exit in mysterium; that
when one generation of it has been swallowed,



PREFACE

or more frequently ejected, by the next, still
man's eternal speculation abides and must
abide; and that this is why, while books of exact
science may be antiquated by new ones, we
can never spare from our shelves a Shakespeare
or a Dryden or even a Gibbon. But my im-
mediate point is that even the most austerely
practical of philosophers, with his eye intent
on prose, admits the value of emotion and the
purple patch.

For a last difficulty of the Prose anthologist
(or the last to be mentioned here): he can by
no contrivance make his book attract the eye
as a Verse anthology — with its glancing differ-
ences of metre, its stanzas, its long and short
lines of type — so easily and naturally does. His
type must sit blockishly on the page, broken
only by paragraphs or by quotations. There is
no help for him here.

In face of all this, on what can he rely even for
hope ? Simply, I believe, on the courage of a
conviction that of his acquaintance with English
prose and by driving at practice in the English
way, he (or somebody on the strength of an idea)
can make a serviceable and portable volume
which shall remind not only many stay-at-home
quiet-living folk but many an Englishman on
his travels and (still better) many a one in exile

xii



PREFACE

on far and solitary outposts of duty, of the
nobility of this Island, its lineage and its
language. I claim here, and with all emphasis,
that my book is not one of Specimens : that
a critic will mistake its purpose who starts
judging it by the amount of space, the number
of extracts, assigned to so-and-so ; as that he
may likely be mistaken in deeming me ignorant
of an author not included or, in his opinion, in-
sufficiently represented as against one of acknow-
ledged importance. Mine is not an effort at
' class-listing ' — a method always repulsive to
me in dealing with literature.

The anthologist, as I understand his trade,
must have a ' notion ' of his own, a ' pattern in
the carpet ', though he cannot easily define his
pattern. If pressed, I should confess to one
or two things.

To begin with, I have tried to make this book
as representatively English as I might ; with
less thought of robust and resounding ' patriot-
ism' than of that subdued and hallowed emotion
which, for example, should possess any man's
thoughts standing before the tomb of the
Black Prince in Canterbury Cathedral: a sense
of wonderful history written silently in books
and buildings, all persuading that we are
heirs of more spiritual wealth than, may be,
we have surmised or hitherto begun to divine.

Xlll



PREFACE

With this in my mind — keeping English prose
as a grand succession while yet trying to re-
lease it from any order of ' specimens I have
(and the critics are welcome to the admission)
not cared a whit for the number of extracts by
which this or that author is over or under ' re-
presented'. All comment directed upon this will
simply ignore the book's purpose. There is a
great deal of Berners' Froissart. Why ? For
two reasons : the first that it holds the core of
true English gentility : the second that, in the
matter of technique, our prose learnt its grace of
our dear enemy, France.

For a like reason I have been bold to include
an amount of 'out-of-door ' matter that may here
and there be considered to fall beneath the
dignity of high prose and would anyhow over-
weight a book of ' specimens '. For it is curious
to observe, in contrast with our poets who sing
of green country all the time, what a dispro-
portionate mass of our prose is urban, and how
rarely it contrives, at its best, to get off the
pavement. As a countryman I may easily be
blamed for a stubborn zeal in redressing this
balance.

Yet, this opportunity given, I do not repent
of my attempt to redress it. Let me illustrate.
When Wolfe crossed the St. Lawrence at night
to scale the heights of Abraham, it is recorded

XIV



PREFACE



that he murmured a stanza or two from Gray's
Elegy — that his vision on that dark passage went
back to a green and English country church-
yard; so if the reader will turn to an extract
I have taken from Charles Reade (No. 429) he
will feel this imperishable land of ours revived,
and with tears, in the hearts of its roughest
outcasts. Those men had no ' patriotism ', no
sense of any duty to England : a fair sprinkling
of them, perhaps, had been convicts and 4 left
their country for their country's good '. But
what they felt is just what I could wish this
book to recall to the breast of any gallant
Englishman on outpost duty in fort or tent.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit et immemores non sinit esse sui.

I propose that, with the aid of the Clarendon
Press, this book shall be put upon sale on
November 25, 1925, twenty-five years to a day
since The Oxford Book of English Verse saw the
light and started to creep into public recog-
nition, at first (as I remember) very slowly.
While no more superstitious than ordinary men,
I take a pleasure in observing birthdays and
other private anniversaries as well as those of the
Church: and it is my fancy to choose this as
an omen of continuance in some public favour.
A quarter of a century is a large slice in the life

XV



PREFACE



of any man who pretends (as in this book must
be pretended) some claim to preserve a capacity
for discerning good literature from that which
is less good : and I feel that the interval may,
as happens to men, have somewhat chilled and
hardened the judgement. I have, for example,
removed out of this anthology many sounding
passages for the sole reason that on second
thoughts they did not ring true — that is to me,
at my time of life, when the instinct to admire is
subdued by a scruple against leaving this world
with any profession of knowing more than one
does. And on a similar principle, in covenant
with the years, I have felt it right to concede
that my sympathy with prose nowadays being
written, though often warm enough, misses a
right capacity to discriminate. Therefore I end
this book with writers who had already solidified
their work by 19 14, and trust that the reader
will accept this break-off" as reasonable and
allow me donatum tarn rude to hang up just
there the old harness. Yet, relinquishing it,
I look forward in entire faith to the opening
fields. The Newspaper Press admits to-day
a portentous amount of that Jargon, or flaccid
writing to which flaccid thought instinctively
resorts. But literature, I repeat, is memorable
speech, recording memorable thoughts and
deeds, and in such deeds at any rate the younger

xvi



PREFACE

generation has not failed. Our fathers have,
in the process of centuries, provided this realm,
its colonies and wide dependencies, with a
speech malleable and pliant as Attic, dignified
asLatin,masculine,yet free of Teutonic guttural,
capable of being precise as French, dulcet as
Italian, sonorous as Spanish, and of captain-
ing all these excellencies to its service. Turning
over these pages before they go to the printer
I recognize (not, I hope, too fondly) that the
whole purpose moves to music. So, taking
leave of a trade which in these years has at least
not lacked the compliment of imitation, I look
back somewhat wistfully on the fields traversed,
to be searched over by other eyes to which I
would fain bequeath, if I could so entreat the
gods, a freshness of eyesight more delicate than
mine.

My debts to those who have granted me the
use of copyright passages are acknowledged
elsewhere. I conclude here with a word of
special gratitude to one or two helpful friends:
to Mr. Charles Whibley, to Professor G.Gordon
of Oxford,and to manyof the Oxford University
Press, at Oxford itself and at Amen House, who
on an old tradition would probably resent my
particularizing them by name. But, in old
regard, I must name two friends: the first, the
late Mr. Charles Cannan, sometime Secretary

xvu



PREFACE

of the Clarendon Press, who suggested this
enterprise and nursed its beginnings: the
second, the late Mr. A. R. Waller, Secretary
ofthe Cambridge University Press, who fostered
it with the purest good-will and of his own wide
reading freely bestowed all that was in his power
to give. I like to think that, when my time
comes in turn, I shall survive in the Oxford
Books of English Verse and English Prose
along with these two good men.

A. Q-C.



XV1U



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I must tender my thanks to those many who have
helped me with permission to include copyright
passages :

Matthew Arnold (Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; Sir
James Barrie ; Lord Beaconsfield (Messrs. Longmans,
Green & Co.) ; Mr. Max Beerbohm (Messrs. Heine-
mann) ; Mr. Hilaire Belloc (Messrs. Methuen & Co.) ;
Mr. Arnold Bennett (Messrs. Chatto & Windus) ;
A. C. Benson (Mr. E. F. Benson) ; The Right Hon.
Augustine Birrell ; F. H. Bradley (Professor A. C.
Bradley) ; Mr. Robert Bridges ; Rupert Brooke (The
Literary Executor and Messrs. Sidgwick and Jack-
son, Ltd.) ; Professor John Burnet ; Samuel Butler
(Jonathan Cape, Ltd.) ; Mr. G. K. Chesterton (Messrs.
Methuen & Co., and Mr. Cecil Palmer) ; R. W.
Church (Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; A. Clutton-Brock
(Mrs. Clutton-Brock) ; Mary E. Coleridge (Sir Henry
Newbolt) ; Joseph Conrad (Messrs. Fisher Unwin and
Messrs. J. M. Dent & Sons) ; Lord Courtney of
Penwith (Lady Courtney and Messrs. Leonard Parsons,
Ltd. ; from ' Cornish Granite ') ; Mr. G. Lowes
Dickinson (Messrs. J. M. Dent & Sons) ; Austin
Dobson (The Executors) ; John Donne (Cambridge
University Press) ; Mr. Charles M. Doughty ;
George Eliot (Messrs. Wm. Blackwood & Sons) ;
' Michael Fairless ' (Messrs. Duckworth & Co.) ; Edward
FitzGerald (Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; J. A. Froude
(Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co ) ; John Galsworthy
(Messrs. Heinemann) ; George Gissing (Messrs. Con-



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



stable & Co.) ; Sir Edmund Gosse ; Mr. R. B.
Cunninghame Graham (Messrs. Heinemann) ; Mr.
Kenneth Grahame ; J. R. Green (Mrs. Green and
Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; H. F. Hall (Messrs.
Macmillan & Co., Ltd.) ; W. E. Hall (The Executors) ;
Mr. Thomas Hardy (Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ;
Lafcadio Hearn (Messrs. Kegan Paul & Co.) ; W. E.
Henley (The Executrix of Mrs. Henley and Messrs.
Macmillan & Co.) ; Maurice Hewlett (The Executor
and Mr. Humphrey Milford) ; W. H. Hudson (The
Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and Messrs.
J. M. Dent & Sons) ; T. H. Huxley (Messrs. Mac-
millan & Co., Ltd.) ; Henry James (Messrs. Heine-
mann and Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; William James
(Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co.) ; Dr. J. H. Jeans ;
Richard Jefferies (Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co.) ;
W. S. Jevons (Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.) ;
Lionel Johnson (Messrs. Elkin Mathews, Ltd.) ; Ben-
jamin Jowett (Jowett Trustees) ; Mr. Rudyard Kipling
(Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; Andrew Lang (Messrs.
Longmans, Green & Co.) ; W. E. H. Lecky (Messrs.
Longmans, Green & Co.) ; Mr. E. V. Lucas (Messrs.
Methuen & Co.) ; The Hon. R. H. Lyttelton (Messrs.
Longmans, Green & Co.) ; Mr. Compton Mackenzie
(Mr. Martin Seeker) ; Sir Henry Maine (Messrs. John
Murray) ; F. W. Maitland (Cambridge University
Press) ; Mr. John Masefield (Mr. Grant Richards) ;
George Meredith (Messrs. Constable & Co.) ; Mr. C. E.
Montague (Messrs. Chatto & Windus) ; Mr. George
Moore (Messrs. Heinemann) ; Lord Morley (Messrs.
Macmillan & Co.) ; William Morris (Mr. Sydney
Cockerell) ; Sir Henry Newbolt ; Cardinal Newman
(Messrs. Longmans, Green & Co.) ; Francis Parkman
(Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; Walter Pater (Messrs.

XX



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



Macmillan & Co.) ; Coventry Patmore (Messrs.

G. Bell & Sons, Ltd.) ; Mark Pattison (The Clarendon
Press) ; F. York Powell (The Clarendon Press) ; Lady
Ritchie (Mr. John Murray) ; The Earl of Rosebery ;
John Ruskin (Messrs. Allen & Unwin) ; W. Clark
Russell (Sir Herbert Russell) ; ' Mark Rutherford '
(Mrs. Hale White) ; Mr. George Saintsbury ; Pro-
fessor George Santayana (Messrs. Constable & Co.) ;
Olive Schreiner (Mr. Cromvright Schreiner and Messrs.
Fisher Unwin, Ltd.) ; Captain R. F. Scott (Mrs.
Hilton Young and Mr. John Murray) ; Mr. G.
Bernard Shaw (Messrs. Constable) ; J. H. Shorthouse
(Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; Sir Harry Smith (Mr.
John Murray) ; Miss Somerville ; R. L. Stevenson
(Mr. Lloyd Osbourne) ; Mr. Lytton Strachey (Messrs.
Chatto & Windus) ; Lord Sumner of Ibstone (The
Incorporated Society of Law Reporters) ; A. C.
Swinburne (Messrs. Constable) ; J. M. Synge (Messrs.
Maunsel & Co.) ; Francis Thompson (Mr. Wilfrid
Meynell and Messrs. Burns, Oates, & Washbourne,
Ltd.) ; T. Traherne (Messrs. P. J. & A. E. Dobell) ;

H. D. Traill (Messrs. Chapman & Hall, Ltd.);
Mr. G. M. Trevelyan (Messrs. Longmans, Green &
Co.) ; Mr. A. B. Walkley ; Mr. H. G. Wells ; Mr.
Charles Whibley (Messrs. Macmillan & Co.) ; J. A.
McNeill Whistler (Messrs. Heinemann) ; Oscar Wilde
(Messrs. Methuen & Co.).

I must beg the forgiveness of any one whose rights
have been overlooked in the above list.

A. Q-C.



xxi



JOHN TREVISA

1326-1402

2 'This l^ealm, this England

AS Fraunce passeth Bretayne, so Bretayne passeth
Jl\. Irlond in faire weder and nobilte, but nought in
helthe. For this llond is best and bringeth forth
trees and fruyt and retheren and other bestes, and
wyn groweth there in som place. The lond hath
plente of foules and of bestes of dyvers manere kynde ;
the lond is plenteous and the see also. The lond is
noble, copious, and riche of nobil welles and of nobil
ryvcres with plente of fische ; there is grete plente
of small fische, of samon, and of elys. So that cherles
in som place fedith sowes with fische. . .

There beeth schepe that bereth good wolle ; there
beeth meny hertes and wylde bestes and fewe wolves ;
therfore the schepe beeth the more sikerliche without
kepynge i-lefte in the folde. In this ilond also beeth
many cities and townes, faire and noble and riche ;
many grete ryveres and stremes with grete plente of
fische ; many faire wodes and grete with wel many
bestes, tame and wylde. The erthe of that lond is
copious of metal ore and of salt welles ; of quarers of
marbel ; of dyuers manere stones, of reed, of whyte ;
of nesche, of hard ; of chalk and of whyte lyme. There
is also white cley and reed forto make of crokkes and
stenes and other vessel, and brent tyle to hele with

4 retheren) cattle 10 cherles) peasants 14 sikerliche) securely

20 quarcrs) quarries 21, 23 reed) red 22 nesche) soft
24 stenes) pots brent) burnt hele) roof

2830 B 1



JOHN TREVISA



hous and cherches, as hit were in the other Samia,

that hatte Samos also. Flaundres loveth the wolle of

this lond, and Normandie the skynnes and the velles ;

Gasquyn the iren and the leed ; Irlond the ore and

the salt ; Europa loveth and desireth the white metal

of this lond. _ , , . ,„,,„,,

r rom the translation of Higden s Polychromcon



2 The ^Mettle of Tour Pasture

BUT the Englische men that woneth in Engelond,
that beeth i-medled in the ilond, that bceth fer
i-spronge from the welles that they spronge of first,
wel lightliche withoute entisynge of eny other men
by here owne assent tornen to contrary dedes. . . .

These men been speedful bothe on hors and on foote,
able and redy to alle manere dedes of armes, and beeth
i-woned to have the victorie and the maistrie in everich
fight wher no treson is walkynge ; and beeth curious,
and kunncth wel inow telle dedes and wondrcs that
thei haveth i-seie. Also they gooth in dyvers londes ;
unnethe beeth eny men richere in her owne londe
othere more gracious in fer and in strange londe.
They konneth betre wynne and gete newe than kepe
her owne heritage ; therfore it is that they beeth
i-spred so wyde and weneth that everich londe is hir
owne heritage. The men beeth able to al manere
sleithe and witte, but tofore the dede blondrynge and
hasty, and more wys after the dede, and leveth ofte
lightliche what they haveth bygonne. . .

2 hatte) was called 3 velles) fells $ white metal) tin 7 woneth)
dwell 8 t-medled) (of race) blended fer) far 11 here) their

14 t-woned) accustomed tbhunnelh) can tnow) enough 17 i-seie)
seen 18 unnethe) hardly 19 othere) or gracious ( favour

2t weneth) think 24 sleithe) contrivance tofore) before



2



JOHN TREVISA

These men despiseth hir owne, and preiseth other
menis, and unnethe beeth apaide with hir owne
estate ; what byfalleth and semeth other men, they
wolleth gladlyche take to hemself ; therfore hit is
that a yeman arraieth hym as a squyer, a squyer as
a knyght, a knyght as a duke, a duke as a kyng.

From the translation of Higden's Polychromcon

3 The Thirteenth- Century SMaUen

MEN byhove to take hede of maydens : for they
ben hote & tendre of complexion ; smale,
pliaunt and fayre of disposicion of body ; shamfaste,
ferdefull and mery touchynge the affeccion of the
mynde. Touchinge outwarde disposicion they be
well nurtured, demure and softe of speche and well
ware what they say : and delycate in theyr apparell. . .
Their hondes and the uttermeste party of their
membres ben full subtyll and plyaunt, theyr voyce
small, theyr speche easy and shorte, lyght in goynge
& shorte steppes, and lyght wit and heed ; they ben
sone angry, and they ben mercyable and envyous,
bytter, gylefull, able to lerne. . . And for a woman is
more meker than a man, she wepeth soner, and is more
envyousse, and more laughinge, & lovinge, and the
malice of the soule is more in a woman than in a man.
And she is of feble kinde, and she makith more lesynges,
and is more shamefaste, & more slowe in werkynge
and in mevynge than is a man, as sayth Aristotle.

From the translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's
De Proprietattbus Rerum

2 apaide) satisfied. 3 semeth) beseems 8 complexion) tempera-
ment 10 ferdefull) fearful ajffeccton) disposition 17 heed)
head 19 for) because 23 lesynges) lies 25 mevynge) moving

3



JOHN WYCLIFFE

1324 7-13S4

4 The Prodigal Son

I UK seith that Crist tolde how, A man hadde two
j sones ; and the yonger of hem seide unto his
fadir, Fadir, gyve me a porcioun of the substance that
fallith me. And the fadir departide him his goodis.
And soone aftir this yonge sone gedende al that fel
to him, and wente forth in pilgrimage into a fer
contre ; and ther he wastide his goodis, lyvynge in
lecherie. And after that he hadde endid alle his goodis,
ther fel a gret hungrc in that lond, and he bigan to
be nedy. And he wente oute, and clevede to oon of
the citizeins of that contre, and this citisein sente him
into his toun, to kepe swyn. And this sone coveitide
to fille his beli with these holes that the hogges eten,
and no man gaf him. And he, turninge agcn, seide,
How many hynen in my fadirs hous ben ful of loves,
and Y penshe here for hungre. Y shal rise, and go to
my fadir, and seie to him, Fadir, Y have synned in
heven, and bifore thee ; now Y am not worthi to
be clepid thi sone, make me as oon of thin hynen.
And he roos, and cam to his fadir. And yit whanne
he was fer, his fadir sawe him, and was moved bi mercy,
and rennyng agens his sone, fel on his nekke, and
kiste him. And the sone seide to him, Fadir, Y have
synned in hevene, and bifore thee ; now Y am not
worthi to be clepid thi sone. And the fadir scide to
his servauntis anoon, Bringe ye forth the firste stole,
and clothe ye him, and gyve ye a ryng in his hond,
and shoon upon his feet. And bringe ye a fat calf, and

4 departide) divided 5 gederide) gathered 1 2 toun) farm

13 holes) husks 15 hynen) servants loves) loaves 19 clepid) called
21 fer) afar off 22 agens) to meet 26 stole) robe

4



JOHN WYCLIFFE

sle him, and ete we and fede us ; for this sone of myn
was deed, and is quykened agen, and he was perishid,
and is foundun. And thei bigunne to feede hem.
And his eldere sone was in the feeld ; and whanne he
cam, and was nygh the hous, he herde a symphonie
and other noise of mynystralcye. And this eldere sone
clepide oon of the servauntis, and axide what weren
thes thingis. And he seide to him, Thy brothir is
comen, and thi fadir hath slayn a fat calf, for he hath
resceyved him saaf. But this eldere sone hadde de-
•deyn, and wolde not come in ; therfore his fadir wente
out, and bigan to preie him. And he answeride, and
seide to his fadir, Lo, so many yeeris Y serve to thee,
Y passide nevere thi mandement ; and thou gavest
me nevere a ldde, for to fede me with my f rendis. But
after that he, this thi sone, that murtheride his goodis
with hooris, is come, thou hast killid to him a fat calf.
And the fadir seide to him, Sone, thou art ever more
with me, and alle my goodis ben thine. But it was
nede to ete and to make mery, for he, this thi brothir,
was deed and lyvede agen ; he was perishid, and is
founden.

Sermons : The Saturday Gospel in the Secunde Wehe m Lente

GEOFFREY CHAUCER

1340 '-1400

5 Little Lewis and the ^Astrolabe

1ITEL Lowis my sone, I have perceived wel by
j ccrtcyne evidences thyn abilite to lerne sciences
touchinge noumbres and proporciouns ; and as wel
considere I thy bisy preyere in special to lerne the

2 perishid) lost 10 dedeyn) indignation 14 passide) overstepped
VJ hooris) harlots

5



GEOFFREY CHAUCER



Tretis of the Astrolabie. Than, for as mechel as
a philosofre seith, ' he wrappeth him in his frend that
condescendeth to the rightful preyers of his frend,'
therfor have I geven thee a suffisaunt Astrolabie as
for oure orizonte, compowned after the latitude of
Oxenford ; upon which, by mediacion of this litel
tretis, I purpose to teche thee a certein nombre of
conclusions apertening to the same instrument. I seye
a certein of conclusiouns, for three causes. The furste
cause is this : truste wel that alle the conclusiouns
that han ben founde, or elles possibly mighten be
founde in so noble an instrument as an Astrolabie, ben
unknowe perfidy to any mortal man in this regioun,
as I suppose. Another cause is this : that sothly, in
any tretis of the Astrolabie that I have seyn, there ben
some conclusions that wole nat in alle thinges per-
formen hir bihestes ; and some of hem ben to harde
to thy tendre age of ten yecr to conseyve. This tretis,
divided in fyve parties, wole I shewe thee under ful
lighte rewles and naked wordes in English ; for Latin
ne canstow yit but smal, my lyte sene. But natheles,
suffyse to thee thise trewe conclusiouns in English, as
wel as suffyseth to thise noble clerkes Grekes thise same
conclusiouns in Greek, and to Arabiens in Arabik, and
to Jewes in Ebrew, and to the Latin folk in Latin ;
whiche Latin folk han hem furst out of othre diverse
langages, and writen in hir owne tonge, that is to sein,
in Latin. And God wot, that in alle thise langages,
and in many mo, han thise conclusiouns ben suffisantly
lerned and taught, and yit by diverse rewles, right as
diverse pathes leden diverse folk the righte wey to
Rome. A Treatise on the Astrolabe

I mechel) much 9 a certein of) a certain (limited) number of

?3 noble clerkes Grekes) learned Greeks 26 han) have

6



GEOFFREY CHAUCER



6 O stelllferi conditor orbis

OTHOU Maker of the whele that bereth the
sterres, which that art y-fastned to thy perdur-
able chayer, and tornest the hevene with a ravisshing
sweigh, and constreinest the sterres to suffren thy lawe ;
so that the mone somtyme shyning with hir ful
homes, meting with alle the bemes of the sonne hir
brother, hydeth the sterres that ben lesse ; and som-
tyme, whan the mone, pale with hir derke homes,
approcheth the sonne, leseth hir hghtes ; and that the
eve-stcrre Hesperus, whiche that in the firste tyme of
the night bringeth forth hir colde arysinges, cometh
eft ayein hir used cours, and is pale by the morwe at
the rysing of the sonne, and is thanne cleped Lucifer.
Thou restrcinest the day by shorter dwelling, in the
tyme of colde winter that maketh the leves to falle.
Thou dividest the swifte tydes of the night, whan
the hote somer is comen. Thy might atempreth the
variaunts sesons of the yere ; so that Zephirus the
deboneir wind bringeth ayein, in the first somer sesoun,
the leves that the wind that highte Boreas hath reft
awey in autumpne, that is to seyn, in the laste ende of
somer ; and the sedes that the sterre that highte
Arcturus saw, ben waxen heye cornes whan the sterre
Sirius eschaufeth hem. Ther nis nothing unbounde
from his olde lawe, ne forleteth the wcrke of his propre
cstat.

O thou governour, governinge alle thinges by certein
ende, why refusestow only to governe the werkes of
men by dewe maneref Why suffrest thou that

4 sweigh) movement 1 1 cometh eft ayein) returns to 12 morwe) morn-
ing 14 dwelling) tarrying 24 eschaufeth) warms 25 forleteth) leaves

7



GEOFFREY CHAUCER



slydinge Fortune torneth so grete entre-chaunginges
of thinges, so that anoyous peyne, that sholde dewely
punisshe felouns, punissheth innocents ? And folk
of wikkede maneres sitten in heye chayres, and
anoyinge folk treden, and that unrightfully, on the
nekkes of holy men ? And vertu , cler-shyninge naturelly,
is hid in derke derkenesscs, and the rightful man bercth
the blame and the peyne of the feloun. Ne for-
sweringe ne the fraude, covered and kembd with a fals
colour, ne anoyeth nat to shrewes ; the whiche shrewes,
whan hem list to usen hir strengthe, they rejoysen hem
to putten under hem the sovereyne kinges whiche
that poeple with-outen noumbre dreden.

O thou, what so ever thou be that knittest alle
bondes of thinges, loke on thise wrecchede erthes ;
we men that ben nat a foule party but a fayr party
of so grete a werk, we ben tormented in this see of
fortune. Thou Governour, withdraw and restreyne
the ravisshinge flodes, and fastne and ferine thise
erthes stable with thilke bonde with whiche thou
governest the hevene that is so large.

Boethius de Consolatione Philosophic

7 Sins of the Tongue

I AT us thanne speken of chydinge and reproche,
j whiche been ful grete woundes in mannes hcrte ;
for they unsowen the semes of frendshipe in mannes
herte. For certes, unnethes may a man pleynly been
accorded with him that hath him openly revyled and
repreved in disclaundre. This is a ful grisly sinne, as
Crist seith in the gospel. . . And certes, chydinge

9 kembd) trimmed (combed) 10 shrewes) scoundrels 25 unnethes)
hardly 27 repreved) reproved disclaundre) disgrace
8



GEOFFREY CHAUCER



may nat come but out of a vileyns herte. For after
the habundance of the herte speketh the mouth ful
ofte. . . . Lo, what seith seint Augustin : ' ther is no-
thing so lyk the develes child as he that ofte chydeth.'
Seint Paul scith eek : ' I, servant of god, bihove nat
to chyde.' And how that chydinge be a vileyns thing
bitwixe alle manere folk, yet it is certes most un-
covenable bitwixe a man and his wyf ; for there is
nevere reste. And therfore seith Salomon, ' an hous
that is uncovered and droppinge, and a chydinge wyf,
been lykc.' A man that is in a droppinge hous in
many places, though he eschewe the droppinge in
o place, it droppeth on him in another place. So
fareth it by a chydinge wyf. But she chyde him in
o place, she wol chyde him in another. . .

Now comth the sinne of hem that sowen and maken
discord amonges folk, which is a sinne that Crist hateth
outrcly ; and no wonder is. For he deyde for to make
concord. And more shame do they to Crist, than dide
they that him crucifyede ; for god loveth bettre that
frendshipe be amonges folk, than he dide his owene
body, the which that he yaf for unitee. Therfore
been they lykned to the devel, that evere been aboute
to maken discord. . .

Now comth janglinge, that may nat been withoute
sinne. And, as scith Salomon, ' it is a sinne of apert
folye.' And therfore a philosophre seyde, whan men
axed him how that men sholde plese the peple, and
he answerde, ' do many gode werkes, and spek fewe
jangles.'

After this comth the sinne of japeres, that been the
develes apes ; for they maken folk to laughe at hir

6 how that) whereas ^ uncovenable) unsuitable 13, 15 0) one
14 But) unless 18 outrely) utterly 26 apert) open

9



GEOFFREY CHAUCER



japerie, as folk doon at the gaudes of an ape. Swiche
japeres deffendeth seint Paul. Loke how that ver-
tuouse wordes and holy conforten hem that travaillen
in the service of Crist ; right so conforten the vileyns
wordes and knakkes of japeris hem that travaillen in
the service of the devel. Thise been the sinnes that
comen of the tonge.

The Persona Tale

SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE

d. 1372

8 Of "Paradise

OF paradys ne can I not speken propurly for I was
not there ; it is fer beyonde and that forthinketh
me. And also I was not worthi. But as I have herd
seye of wyse men beyonde, I schall telle you with
gode will. Paradys terrestre, as wise men seyn, is
the highest place of erthe that is in all the world and
it is so high that it toucheth nygh to the cercle of the
mone, there as the mone maketh hire torn. For sche
is so high that the flode of Noe ne myght not come to
hire, that wolde have covered all the erthe of the
world all abowte and aboven and benethen, saf
Paradys only allone. And this Paradys is enclosed all
aboute with a wall and men wyte not wherof it is.
For the walks ben covered all over with mosse, as it
semeth. And it semeth not that the wall is ston of
nature ne of non other thing that the wall is. And that
wall streccheth fro the south to the north And it
hath not but one entree that is closed with fyre
brennynge, so that noman that is mortall ne dar not

1 gaudes) tricks 2 deffendelh) forbids 5 knakkes) tricks

9 that forthinketh me) I am sorry for that 1 5 torn) turn

10



SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE

entren. And in the most high place of Paradys, evene
in the myddel place, is a welle that casteth out the
.iiij. flodes that rennen be dyverse londes. Of the
whiche the firste is clept Phison or Ganges, that is
all one, and it renneth thorghout Ynde or Emlak. In
the whiche Ryvere ben manye preciouse stones, and
mochel of Lignum Aloes, and moche gravell of gold.
And that other Ryvere is clept Nilus or Gyson, that
goth be Ethiope and after be Egypt. And that other
is clept Tigris, that renneth be Assirye and be
Armenye the grete. And that other is clept Eufrate
that renneth also be Medee and be Armonye and
be Persye. And men there beyonde seyn that alle
the swete watres of the world aboven and benethen
taken hire begynnynge of that wclle of Paradys, and
out of that welle all watres comen and gon. . .
And yee schull understonde that noman that is mor-
tell ne may not approchen to that Paradys. For
be londe noman may go for wylde bestes that ben in
the desertes and for the high mountaynes and grete
huge roches, that noman may passe by, for the derke
places that ben there and that manye. And be the
ryveres may noman go, for the water renneth so
rudely and so scharply, because that it cometh doun
so outrageously from the high places aboven, that it
renneth in so grete wawes that no schipp may not rowe
ne seyle agenes it. And the water roreth so and
maketh so huge noyse and so gret tempest that noman
may here other in the schipp, though he cryede with
all the craft that he cowde in the hieste voys that
he myghte. Many grete lordes han assayed with gret
wille many tymes for to passen be tho ryveres toward
Paradys with full grete companyes, but thei myghte
32 tho) those

11



SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE

not speden in hire viage. And manye dyeden for
weryness of rowynge agenst tho stronge wawes. And
many of hem becamen blynde and many deve for the
noyse of the water. And summe weren pensscht and
loste withinne the wawes. So that no mortcll man
may approche to that place withouten spccyall grace
of God, so that of that place I can sey you nomore.

The Voxage and Travaile of Sir John Maundeville

9 Of the Qentre of the Sarth

A LSO yee have herd me seye that Jerusallm is in
S\. the myddes of the world ; and that may men
preven and schewen, there be a spere that is right into
the erthe upon the hour of mydday whan it is Equfnox-
ium, that scheweth no schadwe on no syde. And that
it scholde ben in the myddes of the world, David
wytnesseth it in the psauter where he seyth : Deus
operatus est salutem in medio terre. Thanne thei
that parten fro tho parties of the west for to go toward
Jerusalem, als many jorneycs as thei gon upward for
to go thider, in als many journeyes may thei gon fro
Jerusalem unto other confynyes of the superficialtee
of the erthe beyonde. And whan men gon beyonde
tho journeys toward Ynde and to the foreyn yles, all
is envyronynge the roundnesse of the erthe and of
the see under oure contrees on this half. And therfore
hath it befallen many tymes of o thing that I have
herd cownted whan I was yong, how a worthi man
departed somtyme from oure contrees for to go
serche the world. And so he passed Ynde and the yles
beyonde Ynde where ben mo than .v. M 1 . yles. And so

I mage) journey 3 deve) deaf 28 .v Ml ) 5000
12



SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE

ionge he wente be see and lond, and so enviround the
world be many seisons, that he fond an yle where he
herde speke his owne langage, callynge on oxen in the
plowgh suche wordes as men speken to bestes in his
owne contree. Whereof he hadde gret mcrvayle, for
he knew not how it myghte be.

The Votage and Travaile of Sir John Maundevrfle

io The Lady of the Land

AND somme men seyn that in the He of Lango
JLx. is yit the doughter of Tpocras in forme and
lykness of a gret dragoun, that is an hundred fadme of
lengthe as men seyn, for I have not seen hire. And
thei of the lies callen hire lady of the lond. And sche
lyeth in an olde castell in a cave, and schcweth twyes
or thryes in the yeei, and sche doth non harm to no
man but yif men don hire harm. And sche was thus
chaunged and transformed from a fair damysele into
lykness of a dragoun be a Goddess that was clept
Dcane. And men seyn that sche schal so endure m
that forme of a dragoun unto tyme that a knyght
come that is so hardy that dar come to hire and kisse
hire on the mouth, and than schall sche turne agen to
hire owne kynde and ben a womman agen, but after
that sche schall not lyven longe. . . And it is not longe
sithen that a yonge man, that wiste not of the dragoun,
wente out of a schipp, and wente thorgh the He til
that he come to the castell, and cam into the cave and
wente so longe til that he fond a chambre, and there
he saugh a damysele that kembed hire hede and lokede
in a myrour. And sche hadde meche tresoure abouten

9 fadme) fathom 27 kembed) combed

13



SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE

hire and he trowede that sche hadde ben a comoun
womman that dwelled there to resceyve men to folye.
And he abode till the damysele saugh the schadewe of
him in the myrour. And sche turned hire toward
him and asked hym what he wolde. And he seyde he
wolde ben hire iemman or paramour, and sche asked
him yif that he were a knyght, and he seyde nay. And
than sche seyde that he myghte not ben hire lemman.
But sche bad him gon agen unto his felowes and let
make him knyght, and come agen upon the morwe,
and sche scholde come out of the cave before him, and
thanne come and kysse hire on the mowth. ' And have
no drede, for I schall do the no maner harm, all be
it that thou see me in lykeness of a dragoun.' For
though thou se me hidouse and horrible to loken onne,
I do the to wytene that it is made be enchauntement.
For withouten doute I am non other than thou seest
now, a womman, and therfore drede the nought.
And yif thou kisse me thou schalt have all this tresoure,
and be my lord and lord also of all that He. And he
departed fro hire, and wente to his felowes to schippe,
and leet make him knyght, and cam agen upon the
morwe for to kysse this damysele. And whan he saugh
hire comen out of the cave in forme of a dragoun so
hidouse and so horrible, he hadde so gret drede that
he fleygh agen to the schipp, and sche folewed him.
And whan sche saw that he turned not agen, sche
began to crye as a thing that hadde meche sorwe.
And thanne sche turned agen into hire cave. And anon
the knyght dyede, and sithen hiderwardes myghte no
knyght se hire but that he dyede anon. But whan
a knyght cometh that is so hardy to kisse hire, he schall
not dye, but he schall turne the damysele into hire
1 6 / do the to wytene) I tell thee 30 sithen hiderwardes) tJl now
14



SIR JOHN MANDEVILLE



right forme and kyndely schapp, and he schal be lord
of all the contreyes and lies aboveseyd.

The Voiage and Travaile of Str John Maundemlle

11 fr(pes Schipp

FRA that cytee of Artyroun go men to an hill that
is clept Sabissocolle ; and there besyde is another
hill that men clepen Ararath, but the Jewes clepen it
Taneez, where Noes schipp rested and yit is upon
that montayne. And men may seen it aferr in cleer
weder. And that montayne is wel a vij. myle high.
And sum men seyn that thei han seen and touched
the schipp, and put here fyngres in the parties where
the feend went out whan that Noe seyde Benedicite.
But thei that seyn suche woordes seyn here wille.
For a man may not gon up the montayne for gret
plentee of snow that is allweys on that montayne,
nouther somer ne wynter, so that noman may gon up
there, ne neuere man dide, sithe the tyme of Noe,
saf a monk that be the grace of God broughte one of
the plankes doun, that yit is in the mynstre at the foot
of the montayne.

The Voiage and Travatle of Sir John Maundeville

THE LADY JULIAN OF NORWICH

1373

12 The Qourtesy of our Lord

FLE we to our Lord and we shall be comforted ;
touch we him and we shall be made clene ; cleeve
to him and we shall be sekir and safe fro al maner of
peril. For our curtes Lord will that we ben as homley

1 kyndely schapp) natural shape 11 the feend) the Demi 22 sehir)
secure 23 curtes) courteous

IS



THE LADY JULIAN

with him as herte may thinke or soule may desiren.
But beware that we taken not so reklesly this homley-
hede that we levyn curtesy. For our Lord himselfe
is sovereyn homleyhede ; and as homley as he is, as
curtes he is, for he is very curtes. And the blissid
creatures that shall ben in hevyn with him without
end, he will have them like to himselfe in all things.
And to be like our Lord perfectly it is our very salvation
and our full bliss. And if we wott not how we shall
don all this, desire we of our Lord and he shal lerne
us. For it is his owne likeing and his worship : blissid
mot he be.

XVI Revelations of Divine Love

ANONYMOUS

c. 1400

13 The ^Magpie and the Eel

IWOLL tell you an ensaumple of a woman that ete
the good morsell in the absence of her husbonde.
Ther was a woman that had a pie in a cage, that
spake and wolde tell talys that she saw do. And so
it happed that her husbonde made kepe a gret ele
in a litell ponde in his gardm, to that entent to yeue
it sum of his frendes that wolde come to see hym ;
but the wyff, whanne her husbond was oute, saide to
her maide, ' late us ete the gret ele, and y will saie to
my husbond that the otour hathe eten hym ; ' and so
it was done. And whan the good man was come, the
pye began to tell hym how her maistresse had eten
the ele. And he yode to the ponde, and fonde not
the ele. And he asked his wiff wher the ele was

2 homleyhede) (homeliness) intimacy 3 levyn) leave 22 otour)
otter 25 yode) went
16



ANONYMOUS



become. And she wende to have excused her, but
he saide her, ' excuse you not, for y wote well ye have
eten yt, for the pye hathe told me.' And so ther was
gret noyse betwene the man and hys wiff for etinge
of the ele. But whanne the good man was gone, the
maistresse and the maide come to the pie, and plucked
of all the fedres on the pyes hede, saieng, ' thou hast
discovered us of the ele ; ' and thus was the pore pye
plucked. But ever after, whanne the pie sawe a balled
or a pilled man, or a woman with an high forhede, the
pie saide to hem, ' ye spake of the ele.' And therfor
here is an ensaumple that no woman shulde ete no
lycorous morcelles in the absens and withoute weting
of her husbond, but yef it so were that it be with folk
of worshipp, to make hem chere ; for this woman was
afterward mocked for the pye and the ele.

The Knight de la Tour Landry

JOHN CAPGRAVE

1393-1464

14 "Times of Tribulation

IN the XXI. yere, whan Kyng Philip of Frauns was
fled thus cowardly fro the sege of Caleys, thci of
the same town offered the town to Kyng Edward
withoute any poyntment. And he lay in the town
a month, considering the strong disposicion thereof.
Thanne, at instauns of the Pope, was taken trews
betwix the two Kyngis for a yere. Aboute the fest
of Seynt Michael, the Kyng took the se into Ynglond
and there had he grete tempest, and mervelous wyndes ;

1 wende) thought 10 pilled) shaven 13 lycorous) dainty

weting) knowledge 14 but yef) unless 17 XXI. yere)

A D 1347 20 poyntment) conditions

17



JOHN CAPGRAVE

and thanne he mad swech a compleynt onto oure
Lady, and seide, O blessed Mayde, what menyth al
this i Evyr, whan I go to Frauns, I have fayre wedir,
and whanne I turne to Ynglond intolerable tempestes.

In the XXII. yere were grete reynes, whech dured
fro the Nativite of Seynt Jon Baptist onto Cristmasse.

And aftir that reyne there folowid a grete pestilens,
specialy in the Est side of the world amongst the
Sarasines. So many deied, that there left scarsly among
hem the tenth man, or the tenth woman. Thei,
seyng this veniauns amongst hem, purposed veryly to
be Cristen. But whan thei wist that the pestilens was
among the Cristen men, than her good purpos sesed.

In the XXIII. yere was the Grete Pestilens of puple.
First it began in the north cuntre ; than in the south ;
and so forth thorw oute the reme. Aftir this pestilens
folowed a moreyn of bestis, whech had nevir be seyn.
For, as it was supposed, there left not in Inglond the
ten part of the puple. Than cesed lordes rentis,
prestis tithes. Because there were so fewe tylmen, the
erde lay untillid. So mech misery was in the lond,
that the prosperite whech was before was nevir recured.

The Chronicle of England

SIR JOHN FORTESCUE

1394 '-1476?

15 The Cheap Defence of England

SOME men haue said that it were good for the
kyng, that the commons of Englande were made
pore, as be the commons of Fraunce. For than thai
wolde not rebelle, as now thai done oftentymes ;

9 left) remained 11 veniauns) vengeance 14 puple) people

22 recured) recovered
18



SIR JOHN FORTESCUE

wich the commons of Fraunce do not, nor mey
doo ; for thai haue no wepen, nor armour, nor good
to bie it with all. To theis maner of men mey be
said with the phylosopher, ad pauca rcspicientes de
facili ennnciant. This is to say, thai that see but few
thynges, woll sone say thair advyses. For soth theis
folke consideren litill the good of the reaume of
Englond, wherof the myght stondith most vppon
archers, wich be no ryche men. And yf thai were
made more pouere than thai be, thai shulde not
haue wherwith to bie hem bowes, arroes, jakkes, or
any other armour of defence, wherby thai myght be
able to resiste owre enymes, when thai liste to come
vppon vs ; wich thai mey do in euery side, con-
siderynge that we be a Ilelonde ; and, as it is said
before, we mey not sone haue soucour of any other
reaume. Wherfore we shull be a pray to all owre
enymyes, but yf we be myghty of owreself, wich
myght stondith most vppon owre pouere archers ;
and therfore thai nedun not only haue suche able-
ments as now is spoken of, but also thai nedun to
be much excersised in shotynge, wich mey not be
done withowt ryght grete expenses, as euery man
experte therin knowith ryght well. Wherfore the
makyng pouere of the commons, wich is the makyng
pouere of owre archers, shalbe the distruccion of the
grettest myght of owre reaume.

The Governance of England
\l jakkes) jackets of qmllei leather 20 nedun) need



19



WILLIAM CAXTON

1422 ?-i49I

16 "Discretion

THER was a child of Rome that was named Papirus
that on a tyme went with his fader whiche was
a senatour into the chambre where as they helde their
counceyll. And that tyme they spak of suche maters
as was comanded and agreed shold be kept secrete upon
payn of their heedes, and so departed. And whan he
was comen home from the senatoire and fro the
counceyll with his fader, his moder demanded of hym
what was the counceyll and whereof they spack and
had taryed so longe there. And the childe answerd to
her and sayd he durst not telle ner saye hit for so moche
as hit was defended upon payn of deth. Than was the
moder more desirous to knowe than she was to fore,
and began to flatere hym one tyme, and afterward to
menace hym that he shold saye and telle to her what
hit was. And whan the childe sawe that he might
have no reste of his moder in no wise, he made her
first promise that she shold kepe hit secrete and to
telle hit to none of the world. And that doon he
fayned a lesing or a lye and sayd to her that the
senatours had in counceyll a grete question and
difference which was this : whether hit were better
and more for the comyn wele of Rome that a man
shold have two wyvys or a wyf to have two husbondes.
And whan she had understonde this, he defended her
that she shold telle hit to none other body. And after
this she wente to her gossyb and told to her this



12 defended) forbidden
20



WILLIAM CAXTON



counceyll secretly, and she told to an other, and thus
every wyf tolde hit to other in secrete. And thus
hit happend anone after that alle the wyves of Rome
cam to the senatorye where the senatours were
assemblid, and cryed with an hye voys that they had
lever, and also hit were better for the comyn wele
that a wyf shold have two husbondes than a man two
wyves.

Game and Playe of the Chesse

17 His Labours

THUS ende I this book, whyche I haue translated
after myn Auctor as nyghe as god hath gyuen me
connyng, to whom be gyuen the laude and preysyng.
And for as moche as in the wrytyng of the same my
penne is worn, myn hande wery and not stedfast, myn
eyen dimmed with ouermoche lokyng on the whit
paper, and my corage not so prone and redy to laboure
as hit hath ben, and that age crepeth on me dayly and
febleth all the bodye, and also because I haue promysid
to dyuerce gentilmen and to my frendes to adresse
to hem as hastely as I myght this sayd book, therfore
I haue practysed and lerned at my grete charge and
dispense to ordeyne this said book in prynte after the
maner and forme as ye may here see, and is not wreton
with penne and ynke as other bokes ben, to thende
that euery man may haue them attones : for all the
bookes of this storye named the Recule of the Historyes
of Troyes thus enpryntid as ye here see were begonne
in oon day, and also fynysshid in oon day, whiche
book I haue presented to my sayd redoubtid lady as

24 attones) at once

21



WILLIAM CAXTON



afore is sayd. And she hath well acceptid hit, and
largely rewarded me : wherfore I beseche almyghty
God to rewarde her euerlastyng blisse after this lyf.
Prayng her said grace and all them that shall rede
this book not to desdaigne the symple and rude werke,
nether to replye agaynst the sayyng of the maters
towchyd in this book, thauwh hyt acorde not vnto
the translacion of other whiche haue wreton hit : for
dyuerce men haue made dyuerce bookes, whiche in
all poyntes acorde not . . . ; but alle acorde in con-
clusion the generall destruccion of that noble cyt6
of Troye. And the deth of so many noble prynces,
as kynges, dukes, Erles, barons, knyghtes, and comyn
peple, and the ruyne irreperable of that Cyte that
neuer syn was reedefyed, whiche may be ensample
to all men duryng the world how dredefull and
Ieopardous it is to begynne a warre, and what harmes,
losses and deth foloweth. Therfore thapostle saith
all that is wreton is wreton to our doctryne, whyche
doctryne for the comyn wele I beseche God maye be
taken in suche place and tyme as shall be moste
nedefull in encrecyng of peas, loue, and charyte,
whyche graunte vs he that suffryd for the same to be
crucyfied on the rood tree. And saye we alle Amen
for charyte.

Epilogue to Book III of the Recuyell of Troy



22



WILLIAM CAXTON



18 His Homage to Qhaucer

THUS endeth this boke whiche is named the boke
of Consolacion of philosophie, whiche that
Boecius made for his comforte and consolacion, he
beyng in exile for the comyn and publick wele, hauyng
grete heuynes & thoughtes and in maner of despayr,
Rehercing in the sayde boke howe Philosophie appiered
to him, shewyng the mutabilite of this transitorie
lyfe, and also enformyng howe fortune and happe
shold bee vnderstonden, with the predestynacion and
prescience of God as moche as maye and ys possible
to bee knowen naturelly, as afore ys sayd in this sayd
boke . . . And for as moche as the stile of it is harde
& difficile to be vnderstonde of simple persones
Therfore the worshipful fader & first foundeur &
enbelissher of ornate eloquence in our Englissh
(I mene, Maister Geffrey Chaucer) hath translated
this sayd werke oute of Latyn in to oure vsual and
moder tonge, folowyng the Latyn as neygh as is
possible to be vnderstande. Wherein in myne
oppynyon he hath deseruid a perpetuell lawde and
thanke of al this noble Royame of Englond, and in
especiall of them that shall rede & vnderstande it.
For in the sayd boke they may see what this transitorie
& mutable worlde is, and wherto euery man liuyng
in hit ought to entende. Thenne for as moche as
this sayd boke so translated is rare & not spred ne
knowen as it is digne and worthy, for the erudicion
and lernyng of suche as ben Ignoraunt & not knowyng
of it, atte requeste of a singuler frende & gossib of
myne, I William Caxton haue done my debuoir
& payne t'enprynte it in fourme as is here afore made,
in hopyng that it shal prouffite moche peple to the

23



WILLIAM CAXTON



wele & helth of theire soules, & for to lerne to haue
and kepe the better pacience in aduersitees. And
furthermore I desire & require you that of your
charite ye wold praye for the soule of the sayd wor-
shipful man Geffrey Chaucer, first translatour of this
sayde boke into Englissh & enbelissher in making the
sayd langage ornate & fayr : whiche shal endure
perpetuelly, and therfore he ought eternelly to be
remembrid.

Preface to Boethius de Consolacione Philosophic

ig Of Le SMorte lArthur

THENNE al these thynges forsayd aledged I coude
not wel denye, but that there was suche a noble
kyng named Arthur, and reputed one of the ix Worthy,
& fyrst & chyef of the cristen men. And many noble
volumes be made of hym & of his nobfe knyghtes in
frensshe, which I have seen & redde beyonde the see,
which been not had in our maternal tongue. But in
walsshe ben many, & also in frensshe, & somme in
englysshe, but no wher nygh alle. Wherfore suche as
have late ben drawen oute bryefly in to englysshe,
I have after the symple connynge that God hath sente
to me, under the favour and correctyon of al noble
lordes and gentylmen, enprysed to enprynte a book
of the noble hystoryes of the sayd kynge Arthur, and
of certeyn of his knyghtes, after a copye unto me
delyverd, whyche copye Syr Thomas Malorye dyd
take oute of certeyn bookes of frensshe and reduced
it in to Englysshe. And I accordyng to my copye
have doon sette it in enprynte, to the entente that

12 of thetx Worthy) of the nine 'Christian Worthies' 22 enprysed)
undertaken

24



WILLIAM CAXTON



noble men may see and lerne the noble actes of
chyvalrye, the Ientyl and vertuous dedes that somme
knyghtes used in tho dayes, by whyche they came to
honour, and how they that were vycious were punysshed
and ofte put to shame and rebuke, humbly bysechyng
al noble lordes and ladyes wyth al other estates of what
estate or degree they been of, that shal see and rede
in this sayd book and werke, that they take the good
and honest actes in their remembraunce, and to
folowe the same. Wherin they shalle fynde many
Ioyous and playsaunt hystoryes, and noble & renomed
actes of humanyte, gentylnesse and chyualryes. For
herein may be seen noble chyualrye, Curtosye,
Humanyte, frendlynesse, hardynesse, loue, frendshyp,
Cowardyse, Murdre, hate, vertue, and synnc. Doo
after the good and leue the euyl, and it shal brynge
you to good fame and renommee.

Preface to Malory's he Morte Arthur

SIR THOMAS MALORY

/t 1470

20 The SVLonth of £May

AND thus it past on from Candylmas untyl after
_ZjL Ester that the moneth of May was come, whan
every lusty herte begynneth to blosomme and to
brynge forth fruyte. For lyke as herbes and trees
bryngen forth fruyte and florysshen in May, in lyke
wyse every lusty herte that is in ony maner a lover
spryngeth and floryssheth in lusty dedes. For it
gyveth unto al lovers courage, that lusty moneth of
May, in some thyng to constrayne hym to some

1 1 renomed) renowned

25



SIR THOMAS MALORY



maner of thyng more in that moneth than in ony other
moneth, for diverse causes. For thenne alle herbes
and trees renewen a man and woman. And lyke wyse
lovers callen ageyne to their mynde old gentilnes and
old servyse, and many kynde dedes were forgeten by
neclygence. For lyke as wynter rasure doth alway
arase and deface grene somer, soo fareth it by unstable
love in man and woman. For in many persons there
is no stabylyte. For we may see al day, for a lytel
blast of wynters rasure anone we shalle deface and lay
aparte true love, for lytcl or noughte, that cost moch
thynge. This is no wysedome nor stabylyte, but it
is feblenes of nature and grete disworshyp who somever
used this. Therfore lyke as May moneth floreth and
floryssheth in many gardyns, soo in lyke wyse lete every
man of worship florysshe his herte in this world, fyrst
unto God, and next unto the ioye of them that he
promysed his feythe unto. For there was never
worshypful man or worshipfull woman but they loved
one better than another. And worshyp in armes may
never be foyled, but fyrst reserve the honour to God,
and secondly the quarel must come of thy lady, and
suche love I calle vertuous love. But now adayes men
can not love seven nyghte but they must have alle
their desyres. That love may not endure by reason.
For where they ben soone accorded, and hasty hete,
soone it keleth. Ryghte soo fareth love now adayes :
sone hote, soone cold. This is noo stabylyte. But the
old love was not so. Men and wymmen coude love
togyders seven yeres, and no lycours lustes were
bitwene them, and thenne was love trouthe and
feythfulnes. And loo in lyke wyse was used love in
kynge Arthurs dayes. Wherfor I lyken love now

21 foyled) defiled 27 keleth) cooleth 30 togyders) together

26



SIR THOMAS MALORY



adayes unto somer and wynter. For lyke as the one
is hote & the other cold, so fareth love now adayes.
Therfore alle ye that be lovers calle unto your remem-
braunce the moneth of May, lyke as dyd quene
Guenever. For whome I make here a lytel mencyon,
that whyle she lyvcd she was a true lover, and therfor
she had a good cnde.

Le Morte Arthur

21 The £Maid of lAstolat

NOW spcke we of the fayre maydcn of Astolat,
that made suche sorowe daye and nyght that
she never slepte, etc, nor drank, and ever she made
her complaynt unto sir Launcclot. So when she had
thus endured a ten dayes, that she fcbled so that she
must nedes passe out of thys world, thenne she shry-
ved her clene, and receyved her creatoure. And ever
she complayned stylle upon sire Launcelot. Thenne
her ghoostly fader bad her leve suche thoughtes.
Thenne she sayd, Why shold I leve suche thoughtes f
am I not an erthely woman? and alle the whyle
the brethe is in my body I may complayne me, for
my byleve is I doo none offence though I love an
erthely man, and I take God to my record I loved
none but sir Launcelot du Lake, nor never shall. And
a clene mayden I am for hym and for alle other. And
sythen hit is the sufferaunce of God that I shalle dye
for the love of soo noble a knyghte, I byseche the hyghe
fader of heven to have mercy upon my sowle, and
upon myn innumerable paynes that I suffred may be
allygeaunce of parte of my synnes. For swete lord

28 allygeaunce) alleviation

27



SIR THOMAS MALORY



Ihesu, sayd the fayre maydcn, I take the to record,
on the I was never grete offenser ageynst thy lawes,
but that I loved this noble knyght sire Launcelot out
of mesure, and of my self, good lord, I myght not
withstande the fervent love wherfor I have my dethe.
And thenne she called her fader sire Bernard and her
broder sir Tyrre, and hertely she praid her fader that
her broder myght wryte a letter lyke as she did endyte
hit : and so her fader graunted her. And whan the
letter was wryten word by word lyke as she devysed,
thenne she prayd her fader that she myght be watched
untyl she were dede : And whyle my body is hote
lete this letter be putt in my ryght hand, and my hande
bounde fast with the letter untyl that I be cold, and
lete me be putte in a fayre bedde with alle the rychest
clothes that I have aboute me, and so lete my bedde
and alle my rychest clothes be laidc with me in a
charyot unto the next place where Tcmse is, and there
lete me be putte within a barget, & but one man with
me, suche as ye trust to stere me thyder, and that my
barget be coverd with blak samyte over and over.
Thus, fader, I byseche yow, lete hit be done. Soo her
fader graunted hit her feythfully alle thynge shold be
done lyke as she had devysed. Thenne her fader and
her broder made grete dole, for when this was done,
anone she dyed. And soo whan she was dede, the
corps and the bedde alle was ledde the next way vnto
Temse, and there a man and the corps & alle were put
in to Temse. And soo the man styred the barget
unto Westmynster, and there he rowed a grete whyle
to & fro or ony aspyed hit.

Soo by fortune kynge Arthur and the quene
Guenever were spekynge togyders at a wyndowe, and

31 or) ere 33 togyders) together
28



SIR THOMAS MALORY

soo as they loked in to Temse they aspyed this blak
barget, and hadde mcrveylle what it mente. Thenne
the kynge called sire Kay, & shewed hit hym. Sir,
said sir Kay, wete you wel there is some newe tydynges.
Goo thyder, sayd the kynge to sir Kay, & take with
yow sire Brandyles and Agravayne, and brynge me
redy word what is there. Thenne these four knyghtes
departed and came to the barget and wente in, and
there they fond the fayrest corps lyenge in a ryche
bedde, and a poure man sittyng in the bargets ende,
and no word wold he speke. Soo these foure knyghtes
retorncd unto the kyng ageyne, and told hym what they
fond. That fayr corps wylle I see, sayd the kynge.
And soo thenne the kyng took the qucne by the hand
& went thydder. Thenne the kynge made the barget
to be holdcn fast ; & thenne the kyng & the quene
entred, with certayn knyghtes wyth them. And there
he sawe the fayrest woman lye in a ryche bedde
coverd unto her myddel with many ryche clothes,
and alle was of clothe of gold, and she lay as though
she had smyled. Thenne the quene aspyed a letter
in her ryght hand, and told it to the kynge. Thenne
the kynge took it, and sayd, Now am I sure this letter
wille telle what she was, and why she is come hydder.
Soo thenne the kynge and the quene wente oute of
the barget, and soo commaundcd a certayne wayte
upon the barget. And soo whan the kynge was come
within his chamber he called many knyghtes aboute
hym, & saide that he wold wete openly what was
vvryten within that letter. Thenne the kynge brake
it, & made a clerke to rede hit. & this was the entente
of the letter : Moost noble knyghte, sir Launcelot,
now hath dethe made us two at debate for your love.
I was your lover, that men called the fayre mayden

39



SIR THOMAS MALORY



of Astolat : therfor unto alle ladyes I make my mone.
Yet praye for my soule, & bery me atte leest, & offre
ye my masse peny ; this is my last request. And a
clene mayden I dyed, I take God to wytnes. Pray for
my soule, sir Launcelot, as thou art pierles. This was
alle the substance in the letter. And whan it was
redde the kyng, the quene and alle the knyghtes wepte
for pyte of the doleful complayntes. Thenne was
sire Launcelot sente for. And whan he was come
kynge Arthur made the letter to be redde to hym.
And whanne sire Launcelot herd hit word by word,
he sayd, My lord Arthur, wete ye wel I am ryghte
hevy of the dethe of this fair damoysel. God knoweth
I was never causer of her dethe by my wyllynge, &
that wille I reporte me to her own broder : here he
is, sir Lavayne. I wille not saye nay, sayd syre Launce-
lot, but that she was bothe fayre and good, and moche
I was beholden unto her, but she loved me out of
mesure. Ye myght have shewed her, sayd the quene,
somme bounte and gentilnes that myghte have pre-
served her lyf. Madame, sayd sir Launcelot, she wold
none other wayes be ansuerd but that she wold be
my wyf, outher els my peramour, and of these two
I wold not graunte her. But I proferd her, for her
good love that she shewed me, a thousand pound
yerly to her and to her heyres, and to wedde ony
manere knyghte that she coude fynde best to love
in her herte. For, madame, said sir Launcelot, I love
not to be constrayned to love. For love muste aryse
of the herte, and not by no constraynte. That is
trouth, sayd the kynge and many knyghtes : love is
free in hym selfe, and never wille be bounden, for
where he is bounden he looseth hym self. Thenne

23 outher) or
3°



SIR THOMAS MALORY



sayd the kynge unto sire Launcelot, Hit wyl be your
woishyp that ye over see that she be entered worshyp-
fully. Sire, sayd sire Launcelot, that shalle be done
as I can best devyse. And soo many knyghtes yede
thyder to behold that fayr mayden. And soo upon
the morne she was entered rychely, and sir Launcelot
offryd her masse peny, and all the knyghtes of the
table round that were there at that tyme offryd with
syr Launcelot. And thenne the poure man wente
ageyne with the barget.

he Morle Arthur

22 The Last ^Meeting of Launcelot
and Quenever

SO it was no bote to stryve, but he departed and
rode westerly, & there he sought a vij or viij
dayes, & atte last he cam to a nonncrye, & than was
quene Guenever ware of sir Launcelot as he walked
in the cloystre. And whan she sawe hym there she
swouned thryse, that al the ladyes & Ientyl wymmen
had werke ynough to holde the quene up. So whan
she myght speke she callyd ladyes & Ientyl wymmen
to hir & sayd, Ye mervayl, fayr ladyes, why I make this
fare. Truly, she said, it is for the syght of yonder
knyght that yender standeth. Whcrfore, I praye you
al, calle hym to me. Whan syr Launcelot was brought
to hyr, than she sayd to al the ladyes, Thorowe this
man & me hath al this warre be wrought, & the deth
of the moost noblest knyghtes of the world. For
thorugh our love that we have loved togyder is my
moost noble lord slayn. Therfor, syr Launcelot, wyt

1 1 bole) good 20 fare) stir

31



SIR THOMAS MALORY



thou wel I am sette in suche a plyte to gete my soule
hele. & yet I truste thorugh Goddes grace that after
my deth to have a syght of the blessyd face of Cryst,
and at domes day to sytte on his ryght syde, for as
synful as ever I was are sayntes in heven. Therfore,
syr Launcelot, I requyre the & beseche the hertelye,
for al the love that ever was betwyxte us, that thou
never see me more in the vysage, & I comande the
on goddes behalfe that thou forsake my companye,
& to thy kyngdom thou torne ageyn & kepe wel thy
royame from warre & wrake. For as wel as I have
loved the, myn hert wyl not serve me to see the, for
thorugh the & me is the flour of kynges & knyghtcs
destroyed. Therfor, sir Launcelot, goo to thy royame,
& there take the a wyf, & lyve with hir with Ioye &
blysse. & I praye the hertelye praye for me to our
Lord, that I may amende my myslyvyng. Now, swete
madam, sayd syr Launcelot, wold ye that I shold
torne ageyn unto my cuntreye & there to wedde a lady ?
Nay, Madam, wyt you wel that shal I never do, for
I shal never be soo fals to you of that I have promysed,
but the same deystenye that ye have taken you to
I wyl take me unto, for to plese Iesu, & ever for you
I cast me specially to praye. Yf thou wylt do so, sayd
the quene, holde thy promyse. But I may never
byleve but that thou wylt torne to the world ageyn.
Wel, madam, sayd he, ye say as pleseth you, yet wyst
you me never fals of my promesse, & God defende
but I shold forsake the woild as ye have do. For in
the quest of the Sank Greal I had forsaken the vanytees
of the world had not your lord ben. And yf I had done
so at that tyme wyth my herte, wylle and thought,
I had passed al the knyghtes that were in the Sanke
10 tome) turn
32



SIR THOMAS MALORY

c

Greal, excepte syr Galahad my sone. And therfore,
lady, sythen ye have taken you to perfeccion, I must
nedys take me to perfection of ryght. For I take
recorde of God, in you I have had myn erthly Ioye.
And yf I had founden you now so dysposed I had caste
me to have had you in to myn owne royame. But
sythen I fynde you thus desposed I ensure you fayth-
fully I wyl ever take me to penaunce, & praye whyle
my lyf lasteth, yf that I may fynde ony heremyte other
graye or whyte that wyl receyve me. Wherfore,
madame, I praye you kysse me, & never nomore. Nay,
sayd the quene, that shal I never do, but absteyne you
from suche werkes ; & they departed.

Le Morte Arthur

23 Sir £c tor's Dirge over Laurie elot

AND soo the bysshop & they al togydere wente
jLx. wyth the body of syr Launcelot dayly, tyl they
came to Ioyous garde. And ever they had an C torches
bernnyng aboute hym ; & so within xv dayes they
came to Ioyous garde. And there they layed his
corps in the body of the quere, & sange & redde many
saulters & prayers over hym and aboute hym, & ever
his vysage was layed open & naked that al folkes myght
beholde hym. For suche was the custom in tho
dayes, that al men of worshyp shold so lye wyth open
vysage tyl that they were buryed. And ryght thus as
they were at theyr servyce there came syr Ector de
Maris, that had vij yere sought al Englond, Scotland
& Walys, sekyng his brother syr Launcelot. And
whan syr Ector herde suche noyse & lyghte in the

9 other) either 13 departed) separated

2830 C 33



SIR THOMAS MALORY

quyre of Ioyous garde he alyght, & put his hors from
hym, & came in to the quyre, & there he sawe men
synge & wepe. And al they knewe syr Ector, but he
knewe not them. Than wente syr Bors unto syr
Ector, & tolde hym how there laye his brother syr
Launcelot dede. And than Syr Ector threwe hys
shelde, swerde & helme from hym ; and whan he
behelde syr Launcelottes vysage he fyl doun in a
swoun, & whan he waked it were harde ony tonge
to telle the doleful complayntes that he made for his
brother. A, Launcelot, he sayd, thou were hede of
al crysten knyghtes ; & now I dare say, sayd syr Ector,
thou sir Launcelot, there thou lyest, that thou were
never matched of erthely knyghtes hande ; & thou
were the curtest knyght that ever bare shelde ; &
thou were the truest frende to thy lover that ever
bestrade hors ; & thou were the trewest lover of a
synful man that ever loved woman ; & thou were the
kyndest man that ever strake wyth swerde ; & thou
were the godelyest persone that ever cam emonge
prees of knyghtes ; & thou was the mekest man &
the Ientyllest that ever ete in halle emonge ladyes ;
& thou were the sternest knyght to thy mortal foo
that ever put spere in the breste. Than there was
wepyng & dolour out of mesure. Thus they kepte
syr Launcelots corps on lofte xv dayes, & than they
buryed it with grete devocyon.

he Marie Arthur

15 airiest) most courteous 21 prees) crowd 26 on lofte)

above ground



34



WILLIAM LOMNER



24 Suffolk dies by Pirates sMayi4SO

To my ryght worchiffull John Paston, at Norwich

RYGHT worchipfull sir, I recomaunde me to yow,
» and am right sory of that I shalle sey, and have
soo wesshe this litel bille with sorwfulle terys, that on-
ethes ye shalle reede it.

As on Monday nexte after May day there come
tydyngs to London, that on Thorsday before the
Duke of Suffolk come unto the costes of Kent full
nere Dover with his ij. shepes and a litel spynner ; the
qweche spynner he sente with certeyn letters to certeyn
of his trustid men unto Caleys-warde, to knowe howe
he shuld be resceyvyd ; and with hym mctte a shippe
callyd Nicolas of the Towre, with other shippis
waytyng on hym, and by hem that were in the spyner,
the maister of the Nicolas hadde knowlich of the dukes
comyng. And whanne he espyed the dukes shepis,
he sent forthe his bote to wete what they were, and
the duke hym selfe spakke to hem, and seyd, he was
be the Kyngs comaundement sent to Caleys-ward, &c.

And they seyd he most speke with here master.
And soo he, with ij. or iij. of his men, wente forth with
hem yn here bote to the Nicolas ; and whanne he
come, the master badde hym, ' Welcom, Traitor,' as
men sey ; and forther the maister desyryd to wete yf
the shepmen woldde holde with the duke, and they
sent word they wold not yn noo wyse ; and soo he was
on the Nicolas tyl Saturday next folwyng.

Soom sey he wrotte moche thenke to be delyverd

3 oneihes) with difficulty 8 spynner) pinnate 9 qweche)

which 27 thenke) thing

35



WILLIAM LOMNER



to the Kynge, but thet is not verily knowe. He hadde
hes confessor with hym, &c.

And some sey he was arreyned yn the sheppe on
here maner upon the appechementes and fonde
gylty, &c.

Also he asked the name of the sheppe, and whanne
he knew it, he remembred Stacy that seid, if he myght
eschape the daunger of the Towr, he should be saffe ;
and thanne his herte faylyd hym, for he thowghte he
was desseyvyd, and yn the syght of all his men he was
drawyn ought of the grete shippe yn to the bote ; and
there was an exe, and a stoke, and oon of the lewdeste
of the shippe badde hym ley down his heddc, and he
should be fair ferd wyth, and dye on a swerd ; and
toke a rusty swerd, and smotte of his hedde withyn
halfe a doseyn strokes, and toke awey his gown of
russet, and his dobelette of velvet mayled, and leyde
his body on the sonds of Dover ; and some sey his
hedde was sette oon a pole by it, and hes men sette
on the londe be grette circumstaunce and preye. And
the shreve of Kent doth weche the body, and sent his
under shreve to the juges to wete what to doo, and
also to the Kenge whatte shalbe doo.

Forther I wotte nott, but this fer is that yf the
proces be erroneous, lete his concell reverse it, &c.

Also for alle your other maters they slepe, and the
freer also, &c.

Sir Thomas Keriel is take prisoner, and alle the
legge harneyse, and abowte iij. m 1 . Englishe men
slayn.

Mathew Gooth with xv c fledde, and savyd hym

io desseyvyd) deceived 12 stoke) block 14 fair ferd wyth) fairly
dealt with 20 be grette circumstaunce) tn great numbers 24 fer) far
27 freer) friar 29 uj. ml ) 3000 31 xvc) 1500

36



WILLIAM LOMNER



selfe and hem ; and Peris Brusy was chefe capteyn,
and hadde x. m 1 . Frenshe men and more, &c.

I prey yow lete my mastras your moder knowe these
tydyngis, and God have yow all yn his kepyn.

I prey yow this bille may recomaunde me to my
mastrases your moder and wyfe, &c.

James Gresham hath wretyn to John of Dam, and
recomaundith hym, &c.

Wretyn yn gret hast at London, the y. day of May,
&c.

W. L.

The Paston Letters



JOHN FISHER

1459-1535

25 The 'Death of the Lady Margaret

BUT specyally whan they sawe the dethe so hast
vpon her and that she must nedes departe from
them, and they sholde forgo so gentyll a maystris, so
tender a lady, then wept they meruayllously, wepte
her ladyes and kynneswomen to whom she was full
kynde, wepte her poore gentylwomen whom she had
loued so tenderly before, wept her chamberers to
whome she was full deare, wepte her chapelaynes and
preestes, wepte her other true & faythfull seruauntes.
And who wolde not haue wept that there had ben
presente. All Englonde for her dethe had cause of
wepynge. The poore creatures that were wonte to
receyue her almes, to whome she was alwaye pyteous
and mercyfull. The studyentes of bothe the vnyuer-

2 x. m'.) 10,000

37



JOHN FISHER

sytees to whome she was as a moder. All the lerned
men of Englonde to whome she was a veray patronesse.
All the vertuous and deuoute persones to whom she
was as a louynge syster, all the good relygyous men and
women whom she so often was wont to vysyte and
comforte. All good preestes and clcrkes to whome she
was a true defenderesse. All the noble men and women
to whome she was a myrroure and exampler of honoure.
All the comyn people of this realme for whom she was
in theyr causes a comyn mediatryce, and toke ryght
grete dyspleasure for them, and generally the hole
realme hathe cause to complayne & to morne her
dethe. . .

Now therfore wolde I aske you this one questyon.
Were it, suppose ye, al this considerd, a meetly thyng
for vs to desyre to haue this noble princes here amongest
vs agayn to forgo the ioyous lyfe aboue, to wante the
presence of the gloryous Trynyte whom she so longe
hathe sought & honoured, to leue that moost noble
kyngdome, to be absent frome the moost blessyd com-
pany of sayntes & sayntesses, & hether to come agayn
to be wrapped & endaungered with the myseries of this
wretched worlde, with the paynf ull dyseases of her aege,
with the other encomberaunces that dayly happethe
in this myserable lyfe f Were this a reasonable request
of oure partye, were this a kynde desyre, were this
a gentyl wysshe, that where she hathe ben so kinde &
louyng a maystresse vnto us, all we sholde more regarde
our owne prouffytes then her more synguler wele &
comfort ? The moder that hathe so grete affeccyon
vnto her sone that she wyll not suffre hym to departe
from her to his promocyon & furtheraunce but alway
kepe hym at home, more regardynge her owne pleasure
than hys wele, were not she an vnkinde & vngentyl
38



JOHN FISHER

moder ? Yes verayly, let vs therfore thynke our moost

louyng maystres is gone hens for her promocyon, for

her grete furtheraunce, for her moost wele & prouffyte.

And herin comforte vs, herin reioyse ourselfe & thanke

almyghty God whiche of his infynyte mercy so gracy-

ously hathe dysposed for her.

The Month's Mind of the noble princess Margaret,
Countess of Richmond and Derby



THOMAS BETSON
26 To his HQnswoman J^atherine l^yche

June 1476

Jesus. An . xvj°.

MY nowne hartely bclovid Cossen Kateryn, I
recomande me unto you withe all the inward-
nesse of myn hart. And now lately ye shall under-
stond that I resseyvid a token from you, the which
was and is to me right hartely welcom, and with glad
will I resseyvid it ; and over that I had a letter from
Holake, youre gentyll Sqwyer, by the which I under-
stond right well that ye be in good helth of body, and
mery at hart. And I pray God hartely to his plesour
to contenew the same : for it is to me veray grete
comforth that ye so be, so helpe me Jesu. And
yf ye wold be a good etter of your mete allwaye,
that ye myght waxe and grow fast to be a woman,
ye shuld make me the gladdest man of the world,
be my trouth : for whanne I remembre your favour
and your sadde lofynge delynge to me-wardes, for

7 nowne) own 10 resseyvid) received 22 sadde) serious

lofynge) loving



39



THOMAS BETSON



south ye make me evene veray glade and joyus in my
hart : and on the tother syde agayn whanne I remem-
bre your yonge youthe, and seeth well that ye be
none etter of youre mete, the which shuld helpe
you greately in waxynge, for south than ye make me
veray hevy agayn. And therfore I praye you, myn
nown swete Cossen, evene as you lofe me to be mery
and to eate your mete lyke a woman. And yf ye so
will do for my love, looke what ye will desyre of
me, whatsomever it be, and be my trouth I promesse
you by the helpe of our Lord to performe it to my
power. I can [no] more say now, but at my comyng
home I will tell you mych more betwene you and me
and God before. And where as ye, full womanly
and lyke a lofer, remembre me with manyfolde
recomendacion in dyversse maners, remyttynge the
same to my discresscion to depart them ther as I
love best, for south, myn nown swete Cossen, ye
shall understond that with good hart and good will
I resseyve and take to my self the one half of them,
and them will I kepe by me ; and the tother half
with hartely love and favour I send hem to you,
myn nown swete Cossen, agayn, for to kepe by you :
and over that I send you the blissynge that our Lady
gave hir dere sonne, and ever well to fare. I pray
you grete well my horssc, and praye hym to gyfe yow
iij of his yeres to helpe you with all : and I will at
my comynge home gyf hym iiij of my ycres and iiij
horsse lofes till amendes. Tell hym that I prayed
hym so. And Cossen Kateryn I thannke you for hym,
and my wif shall thanke you for hym hereafter ;
for ye do grete cost apon hym as it is told me. Myn

1 7 depart) divide 29 horsse lofes) horseshoes 32 do grete

tost) spend much money
40



THOMAS BETSON



nown swete Cossen, it was told me but late that ye
were at Cales to seeke me, but ye cowde not se me nor
fynde me : for south ye myght have comen to my
counter, and ther ye shuld bothe fynde me and see
me, and not have fawtid off me : but ye sought me
in a wronge Cales, and that ye shuld well know yf
ye were here and saw this Cales, as wold God ye were
and som of them with you that were with you at
your gentill Cales. I praye you, gentill Cossen,
comaunde me to the Cloke, and pray hym to amend
his unthryfte maners : for he strykes ever in undew
tyme, and he will be ever afore, and that is a shrewde
condiscion. Tell hym with owte he amend his con-
discion that he will cause strangers to advoide and
come no more there. I trust to you that he shall
amend agaynest myn commynge, the which shalbe
shortely with all hanndes and all feete with Godes
grace. My veray feithefull Cossen, I trust to you
that thowe all I have not remembred my right worship-
full maystres your modyr afore in this letter that ye
will of your gentilnesse recomaunde me to her may-
stresshipe as many tymes as it shall pies you : and
ye may say, yf it plese you, that in Wytson Weke next
I intend to the marte-ward. And I trust you will
praye for me : for I shall praye for you, and, so it
may be, none so well. And Almyghty Jesu make you
a good woman, and send you many good yeres and
longe to lyve in helth and vertu to his plesour. At
greate Cales on this syde on the see, the fyrst day of
June, whanne every man was gone to his Dener, and
the Cloke smote noynne, and all oure howsold cryed
after me and badde me come down ; come down to



4 counter) office 5 fawttd off) missed 10 Cloke) clock

24 marte-ward) to the market

41



THOMAS BETSON



dener at ones ! and what answer I gave hem ye know
it of old.

Be your feithefull Cossen and lofer
Thomas Betson.
I sent you this rynge for a token.

To my feithefull and hartely belovid Cossen
Kateryn Ryche at Stonor this letter be delyvered in
hast.

Stonor Letters and Papers

ADAM OF EYNSHAME. Englished

c. 1480

27 The £Monk awakes from his Vision

How the monke came owte ageyne throw the same gate
of paradyse. Ca. 181

THERFORE when y had seyn al these syghtys
above seyde and many othyr innumerable, my
lorde Sent Nycholas that hylde my by the hande seyde
schortly thys to me. Loo sonne, he seyde, now a party
aftyr thy peticion and grete desir thow haste seyne,
and beholde the state of the worlde that ys to cumme
as hyt myghte be to possible. . .

Of the swete pele and mclodye of bettys that he herde in
paradyse and also how he came to hym self ageyne

And whyle the holy confessour Sent Nycholas thys
wyse spake yet with me, sodenly y herde ther a solenne
pele and a rynggyng of a mervelus swetenes, and as
al the bellys yn the worlde, or whatsumever ys of
sownyng, had be rongen togedyr at onys. Trewly yn
thys pele and rynging brake owte also a mervelus
swetenes, and a variant medelyng of melody sownyd

26 medelyng) mtngltng
43



ADAM OF EYNSHAME



wyth alle. . . Sothly anone as that gret and mervelus
sownnyng and noyse was cessyd, sodenly y saw myselfe
departyd fro the swete feleschippe of my duke and leder
Sent Nicholas. Than was y returnyd to myselfe ageyne,
and anone y herd the voycis of my brethyrne that
stode abowte our bedde ; also my bodely strenthe
cam ageyn to me a ly tyl and a litil, and myn yes opinde
to the use of seying as ye sawe ryghte wele. . . Ful de-
lectable hyt was to hym, as he seyde, fro that tyme
forthe, as of te as he herde any solenne pele of ryngyng
of bellys, bycause hyt wolde then cum to hys mynde
ageyne, the ful swete pele and melody the whyche he
herde when he was amonge the blessyd sowlys yn.
paradyse. Sothely aftyr that he was cum to hymselfe,
and hys brethirne had tolde hym that now ys the holy
tyme of Estyr, than fyrst he belevyd, when he herde
hem rynge solenly to complen. For then he knew
certenly that the pele and melodye that he herde
yn paradyse wyth so grete ioy and gladnes betokynde
the same solennyte of Estir yn the whyche owre
blessyd lorde and sauyur Jesus Criste rose uppe
visibly and bodely fro dethe onto lyfe, to whome wyth
the Fadyr and the Holy Gooste be now and evermore
everlastyng joy and blysse Amen.

The 1482 edition of William de Machhnes

JOHN BOURCHIER, LORD BERNERS

1467-1533

28 "The Death of the Bruce

IT fortuned that kyng Robert of Scotland was right
sore aged, and feble ; for he was greatly charged
with the great sickenes, so that ther was no way with
hym but deth. And whan he felte that his ende drew

43



JOHN BOURCHIER

nere, he sent for suche baronis & lordis of his realme
as he trusted best ; & shewed them, how there was
no remedy with hym but he must nedes leue this
transitory lyfe : Commaundyng them on the faith and
trouth that they owed hym, truly to kepe the realme,
and ayde the yong prince Dauid his sonne, and that
whan he were of age, they shulde obey hym and crowne
hym kyng, and to mary hym in suche a place as was
conuenient for his estate. Than he called to hym the
gentle knyght sir W ilham Duglas, & sayde before all the
lordes : Sir W tlliam my dere frend, ye lenowe well that
I haue had moche ado in my dayes to vphold and sus-
teyne the ryght of this realme, and whan I had most
ado, I made a solemne vow, the whiche as yet I haue
nat accomplysshed, whereof I am right sory. The
which was, if I myght acheue and make an ende of al
my warres, so that I myght ones haue brought this
realme in rest and peace, than I promysed in my mynd
to haue gone, and warred on Christes enemies, ad-
uersaries to our holy christen faith. To this purpose
myn hart hath euer entended, but our Lorde wolde nat
consent therto, for I haue had so moche ado in my
dayes, & nowe in my last entreprise I haue taken suche
a malady that I can nat escape. And syth it is so that
my body can nat go nor acheue that my hart desireth,
I wyll sende the hart in stede of the body to accom-
plysshe myn avowe, and bycause I knowe nat in all my
realme no knyght more valyaunt than ye be, nor of
body so well furnysshed to accomplysshe myn avowe
in stede of my selfe : Therf ore I require you myn owne
dere & speciall frende that ye wyll take on you this
voiage for the loue of me, and to acquite my soule
agaynst my Lorde God. For I trust so moche in your
noblenes and trouth, that and ye wyll take on you>

44



LORD BERNERS

I doubte nat but that ye shall achyue it, and than shall
I dye in more ease and quiete, so that it be done in
suche maner as I shall declare vnto you. I will that
as soone as I am trepassed out of this worlde that ye
take my harte owte of my body, and embawme it,
and take of my treasoure as ye shall thynke sufficient
for that entreprise, both for your selfe and suche
company as ye wyll take with you, and present my
hart to the holy Sepulchre where as our Lorde laye,
seyng my body can nat come there. And take with you
suche company and purueyauncc as shalbe aparteynyng
to your estate. And where soeuer ye come let it be
knowen howe ye cary with you the harte of kyng
Robert of Scotland, at his instaunce and desire, to be
presented to the holy Sepulchre. Than all the lordes
that herde these wordes, wept for pitie. And whan
this knyght, syr William Duglas myght speke for
wepyng, he sayd : A, gentle & noble kyng, a .C. tymes
I thanke your grace of the great honour that ye do to
me, sith of so noble and great treasure ye gyve me
in charge. And syr I shall do with a glad harte all that
ye haue commaunded me, to the best of my true power,
howe be it I am nat worthy nor sufficient to achyve
suche a noble entreprise. Than the kyng sayd, A, gentle
knyght, I thanke you so that ye wyl promyse to do it.
Sir, sayd the knyght, I shall do it vndoubtedly, by the
faythe that I owe to God, and to the ordre of knyght-
hode. Than I thanke you, sayd the kyng : for nowe
shall I dye in more ease of my mynde, sith that I
knowe that the most worthy and sufficient knyght of
my realme shall achyue for me, the whiche I coulde
neuer atteyne unto. And thus soone after thys noble
Robert de Bruse kyng of Scotland, trepassed out of this
4 trepassed) gone fa-Ik

45



JOHN BOURCHIER

Tncertain world, and hys hart taken out of his body,
and embaumed, and honorably he was entred in the
abbey of Donfremlyn, in the yere of our Lord God,
M.CCC.xxvii, the .vii. day of the moneth of Nouembre.

Froissart's Chronicles



2g The 'Battle of Cregy

THE valyant kyng of Behaygne called Charles of
Luzenbourge, sonne to the noble emperour Henry
of Luzenbourge, for alt that he was nyghe blynde, whan
he vnderstode the order of the batayle, he sayde to
them about hym, Where is the lordc Charles my son ?
his men sayde Sir we can nat tell, we thynke he be
fightynge. Then he sayde Sirs ye are my men, my
companyons and frendes in this iourney. I requyre
you bring me so farre forwarde, that I may stryke one
stroke with my swerde. They sayde they wolde do his
commaundement : and to the intent that they sholde
nat lese hym in the prease, they tyed all their raynes
of their bridelles eche to other. . . Than the seconde
batayle of th'englysshmen came to socour the princes
batayle, the whiche was tyme, for they had as than
moche ado, and they with the prince sent a messanger
to the kynge, who was on a lytell wyndmyll hyll. Than
the knyght sayd to the kyng, Sir, th'erle of Warwyke,
and th'erle of Canfort, sir Reynolde Cobban, and other
suche as be about the prince your sonne ar feersly
fought withall and are sore handled : wherfore they
desyre you that you and your batayle wold come and
ayde them, for if the frenchmen encrease as they dout
they wyll, your sonne and they shall haue moche ado.
Than the kynge sayde Is my sonne dede or hurt, or on
4 6



LORD BERNERS



the yerthe felled ? No sir, quoth the knyght, but he is
hardely matched, wherfore he hathe nede of your
ayde. Well, sayde the kyng, retourne to hym and to
them that sent you hyther, and say to them that they
sende no more to me for any aduenture that falleth, as
long as my sonne is alyue: and also say to them that they
suffre hym this day to wynne his spurres, for if God be
pleased I woll this iourney be his, and the honoure
therof, and to them that be aboute him. Than the
knyght retourned agayn to them and shewed the kynges
wordes, the which gretly encouraged them, and repoyned
in that they had sende to the kynge as they dyd. . .

Whan the nyght was come, and that th'Englysshmen
herd no more noyse of the frenchemen, than they
reputed themselfe to haue the vyctorie and the french-
men to be dysconfited, slayne and fledde away. Than
they made great fyers and lyghted vp torchesse and
candelles, bycause it was very darke. Than the kyng
auayled downe fro the lytell hyll where as he stode,
and of all that day tyll than his helme came neuer
off on his heed. Than he went with all his batayle to
his sonne the prince, and enbrased hym in his armes
and kyst hym, and sayde Fayre sonne, God gyue you
good perseuerance, ye ar my good son, thus ye haue
aquyted you nobly : ye ar worthy to kepe a realme.

Froissart's Chronicles

30 The 'Burghers of Qalais

AFTER that the frenche kyng was thus departed
1. fro Sangate, they within Calays sawe well howe
their socoure fayled them, for the whiche they were in
great sorrow. Than they desyred so moche their
captayn sir John of Vyen, that he went to the walles

8 tourney) day 11 repoyned) repented

47



JOHN BOURCHIER

of the towne, and made a sygne to speke with some
person of the hoost. Whan the kyng herde therof, he
sende thyder sir Gaultier of Manny, and sir Basset.
Than sir John of Vyen sayd to them : Sirs, you be right
valyant knyghtes in dedes of armes, and you knowe well
howe the kynge my maister hath sende me and other
to this towne, and commaunded vs to kepe it to his
behofe, in suche wyse that we take no blame nor to
hym no dammage ; and we haue done all that lyeth
in oure power. Nowe our socours hath fayled vs, and
we be so sore strayned that we haue nat to lyue
withall, but that we muste all dye, or els enrage for
famyn, without the noble and gentyl kyng of yours
woll take mercy on vs ; the which to do we requyre
you to desyre hym, to haue pytye on vs, and let vs
go and depart as we be, and lette hym take the towne
and castell and all the goodes that be therin, the whiche
is great habundaunce. Than sir Gaultyer of Manny
sayde, Sir, we knowe somwhat of the entencyon of the
kynge our maister, for he hath shewed it vnto vs. Surely
knowe for trouth it is nat his mynde that ye nor they
within the towne shulde depart so, for it is his wyll
that ye all shulde put your selfes into his pure wyll to
ransome all suche as pleaseth hym and to putte to
dethe suche as he lyste, for they of Calays hath done
hym suche contraryes and despyghtes, and hath caused
hym to dyspende soo moche good, and loste many of
his menne, that he is sore greued agaynst them. Than
the captayne sayde, Sir, this is to harde a mater to vs,
we ar here within a small sorte of knyghtes and squyers,
who hath trewely serued the kynge our maister, as
well as ye serve yours in like case. And we haue
endured moche payne and vnease, but we shall yet

30 sorte) company
48



LORD BERNERS

endure as moche payne as euer knyghts did rather
thanne to consent that the worst ladde in the towne
shulde haue any more yuell than the grettest of vs all.
Therefore sir we pray you that of your humylite yet
that you will go and speke to the kynge of Englande,
and desyre hym to haue pytie of vs, for we trust in hym
so moche gentylnesse, that by the grace of God his
purpose shall chaunge. Sir Gaultier of Manny and sir
Basset retourned to the kynge, and declared to hym
all that hadde ben sayde : the kynge sayde he wolde
none other wyse, but that they shulde yelde theym vp
symply tohis pleasure. Than sir Gaultyer sayde, Sir, sau-
yng your dyspleasure in this, ye may be in the wronge,
for ye shall gyue by this an yuell ensample : if ye sende
any of vs your servaunts into any fortresse, we will nat
be very gladde to go, if ye putte any of theym in the
towne to dethe after they be yelded, for in lykewise
they will deale with vs, if the case fell lyke : the whiche
wordes dyuerse other lordes that were there present
sustayned and maynteyned. Than the kynge sayde,
Sirs, I will nat be alone agaynst you all, therefore sir
Gaultyer oi Manny ye shall goo and say to the capytayne,
that all the grace that they shall fynde nowe in me is,
that they lette sixe of the chiefe burgesses of the towne
come out bare heded, bare foted, and bare legged, and
in their shertes, with haulters about their neckes, with
the kayes of the towne and castel in their handes, and
lette theym sixe yelde themselfe purely to my wyll,
and the resydewe I will take to mercy. Than sir
Gaultyer retourned and founde sir John of Vyen styll
on the wall abydinge for an answere : than sir
Gaultier shewed hym all the grace that he coulde
gette of the kynge. Well, quoth sir Joban, Sir, I requyre
you tary here a certayne space tyll I go into the towne

49



JOHN BOURCHIER

and shewe this to the commons of the towne who
sent me hyder. Than sir 'John went vnto the market
place and sowned the common bell : than incontinent
men and women assembled there : than the captayne
made reporte of all that he had done, and sayde, Sirs,
it wyll be none otherwyse, therfore nowe take aduyse
and make a shorte aunswere. Thanne all the people
beganne to wepe and to make such sorowe that there
was nat so hard a hert if they had sene them but that
wolde haue had great pytie on theym : the captayne
hymselfe wepte pyteously. At last the moost riche
burgesse of all the towne called Ewstace of saynt
Peters rose vp and sayde openly. Sirs, great and small,
great myschiefe it shulde be to suffre to dye suche
people as be in this towne, other by f amyn or otherwyse,
whan there is a meane to saue theym. I thynke he or
they shulde haue great merytte of our lorde God that
myght kepe theym fro suche myschiefe : and for my
parte I haue so good truste in our lorde God that if
I dye in the quarel to saue the residewe that God wolde
pardone me. Wherefore to saue them I wyll be the
first to putte my lyfe in ieopardy. Whan he had thus
sayde euery man worshypped hym, and dyuers kneled
downe at his fete with sore wepyng and sore sighes.
Than another honest burgesse rose and sayde I wyll
kepe company with my gossyppe Eustace, he was called
John Dayre. Than rose up Jaques of Wyssant, who
was riche in goodes and herytage : he sayd also that he
wolde holde company with his two cosyns in likwyse :
so dyd Peter of Wyssant his brother, and thanne rose
two other: they sayde they wolde do the same. Thanne
they went and aparelled them as the kynge desyred. . .
Whan sir Gaultier presented these burgesses to the
kyng they kneled downe and helde vp their handes

5°



LORD BERNERS

and sayd, Gentyll kyng, beholde here we sixe who were
burgesses of Calays and great marchantes, we haue
brought to you the kayes of the towne and of the
castell, and we submyt ourselues clerely into your wyll
and pleasure, to saue the resydue of the people of
Calays, who haue suffred great payne. Sir, we beseche
your grace to haue mercy and pytie on us through
your hygh nobles : than all the erles & barownes, and
other that were there wept for pytie. The kyng loked
felly on theym, for greatly he hated the people of Calys,
for the gret damages and dyspleasures they had done
to hym on the see before. Than he commaunded their
heedes to be stryken off. Than euery man requyred
the kyng for mercy, but he wolde here no man in that
behalf e. Than sir Gaultier of Manny said A, noble kyng,
for Goddes sake refrayn your courage, ye haue the name
of souerayn nobles, therfore nowe do nat a thyng that
shulde blemysshe your renome, nor to gyue cause to
some to speke of you villany, euery man will say it is
a great cruelty to put to deth suche honest persons,
who by their owne wylles putte themselue into your
grace to saue their company. Than the kyng wryed
away fro hym, and commaunded to sende for the
hangman, and sayd they of Calys hath caused many of
my men to be slayne, wherfore these shall dye in like
wyse. Than the quene beynge great with chylde,
kneled downe & sore wepyng sayd : A, gentyll sir, syth
I passed the see in great penll I haue desyred nothyng
of you, therfore nowe I humbly requyre you in the
honour of the son of the virgyn Mary and for the
loue of me, that ye will take mercy of these sixe
burgesses. The kyng behelde the quene & stode styll
in a study a space, and than sayd, A, dame, I wold ye
10 felly) fiercely it nobles) noblesse 22 wryed) turned

5 1



JOHN BOURCHIER

had ben as nowe in some other place, ye make 3uche
request to me that I can nat deny you ; wherfore
I gyue them to you to do your pleasure with theym.
Than the quene caused them to be brought into her
chambre, and made the halters to be taken fro their
neckes and caused them to be newe clothed, and gaue
them their dyner at their leser. And than she gaue
ech of them sixe nobles, and made them to be brought
out of thoost in sauegard & set at their lyberte.

Froissart's Chronicles

31 J°hfi 'Ball's ^Preaching

THER was an vsage in England, & yet is in diuerse
countreys, that the noble men hath great fraun-
ches ouer the comons, and kepeth them in seruage :
that is to say, their tenauntes ought by custome to
laboure the lordes landes, to gather and bring home
theyr comes, & some to threshe and to fanne and by
seruage to make theyr hey, and to heaw their wood
and bring it home : all these thyngs they ought to do
by seruage. And ther be mo of these people in
Englande, than in any other realme : thus the noble
men and prelates arre serued by them, and specially in
the countie of Brendpest, Sussetter, and Bedford. These
vnhappy people of these sayd countreys began to styre,
bycause they sayde they were kept in great seruage.
And in the begynning of the worlde, they sayd they
were no bonde men. Wherfore they maynteyned that
none ought to be bounde withoute he dyd treason to
his lorde : as Lucifer dyde to God. But they sayd they
coude haue no such batayle, for they were nother
angelles nor spirittes, but men fourmed to the simi-
lytude of their lordes : sayng, why shuld they than

7 User) ease 9 thoost) tfte host 15 fanne) winnow

52



LORD BERNERS

be kept so undre lyke bests, the which they sayd they
wold no lengar suffre, for they wolde be all one : and
if they labored or dyd any thyng for theyr lordes, they
wold haue wages therfore as well as other. And of
this imaginacion was a folisshe preest in the countie of
Kent, called Johan Ball, for the which folysshe wordes
he had ben thre tymes in the bysshop of Canterburies
prison. For this preest vsed often tymes on the son-
dayes after masse, whanne the people were goynge
out of the mynster, to go in to the cloyster & preche,
and made the people to assemble about hym, and
wolde say thus : A, ye goode people, the maters gothe
nat well to passe in Englande, nor shall nat do tyll
euery thyng be common, and that there be no vil-
layns nor gentylmen, but that we may be all vnyed
toguyder, & that the lordes be no greatter maisters
than we be. What haue we deserued, or why shulde
we be kept thus in seruage f We be all come fro one
father and one mother, Adam and Eue. Whereby can
they say or shewe that they be gretter lordes than we
be, sauynge by that they cause vs to wyn and labour,
for that they dispende ? they are clothed in Ueluet
and chamlet furred with grise, and we be vestured with
pore clothe : they haue their wynes, spyces, and good
breed, and we haue the drawynges out of chaffe,
& drinke water. They dwell in fayre houses, and we
haue the payne and traveyle, rayne, and wynde in the
feldes. And by that, that cometh of our labours, they
kepe and maynteyne their estates. We be called their
bondmen, and without we do redilye them seruyce,
we be beaten. And we haue no souerayne to whom
we may complayne, nor that wyll here vs, nor do vs
right. Lette vs go to the kyng, he is yonge : & shewe
hym what seruage we be in : and shewe him howe we

S3



LORD BERNERS



wyll haue it otherwyse, or els we wyll prouyde vs of
some remedy. And if we go togyder, all maner of
people that be nowe in any bondage wyll folowe vs,
to thentent to be made fre. And whan the kyng
seyth vs, we shall haue some remedy, outher by fayr-
nesse or otherwyse. Thus John Ball sayd on sundayes,
whan the people issued out of the churches in the
vyllages. Wherfore many of the meane people loued
him, & such as entended to no goodnesse sayde, howe
he sayd trouth : and so they wolde murmure one
with anothere in the felds and in the wayes, as they
went togyder : Affirming how Johan Ball sayd trouthe.

Froissart's Chronicle*

SIR THOMAS MORE

1478-1535

32 How Jar is Honest £Mirth lawful

T flNCENT. . . And first, good uncle, ere we pro-
y cede farther, I wil be bold to move you one thing
more of that we talked when I was here before. For
when I revolved in my minde againe the thinges that
were concluded here by you, methought ye would in
no wyse that in any tribulacion men shoulde seke for
comforte eyther in worldly thing or fleshly, which
mynde uncle of yours, semeth somewhat hard, for
a mery tale with a frende refresheth a man much,
& without any harme lyghteth hys mynde, and amend-
eth his courage and hys stomake, so that it semeth but
well done to take suche recreacion. And Salomon
sayeth I trowe that men should in heavines geve the
sory man wine to make hym forgeat his sorowe. And
saynct Thomas saieth that propre pleasaunte talking
which is called ivrpa-irekia is a good vertue seruing to
refreshe the minde, & make it quicke and lusty to
54



SIR THOMAS MORE



labor and study againe, where continuall fatigacion
would make it dull and deadly.

Anthony. Cosen, I forgat not that point, but I longed
not muche to touche it ... Of trueth Cosin, as you knowe
very well, myselfe am of nature even halfe a gigglot
and more. I woulde I coulde as easely mende my faulte
as I wel knowe it, but scant can I restraine it as
olde a foole as I am : howbeit so parcial wil I not
be to my fault as to praise it. . . Cassianus that very
verteous man rehearseth in a certayne collacion of
his, that a certaine holy father in making of a sermon,
spake of heaven and heavenly thynges, so celestially,
that much of his audience with the swete sounde
therof, began to forget all the world and fall aslepe :
whiche when the father beheld, he dissembled their
sleping, and sodeinly sayd unto them : I shal tell you
a mery tale. At which worde they lyfte up their
heades and harkened unto that. And after the slepe
therwith broken, heard hym tel on of heaven agayne.
In what wyse that good father rebuked than their
untowarde myndes so dull unto the thyng that all our
lyfe we labor for, & so quicke and lusty towarde other
tryfles, I neither beare in mynde, nor shal here nede
to rehearse. But thus much of that matter suffiseth
for our purpose, that wheras you demaunde me
whither in tnbulacion men may not sometyme re-
freshe themselfe with worldlye myrth & recreacion,
I can no more say, but he that cannot long endure
to holde up his head and heare talking of heaven
except he be now & than betwene (as though
heaven were heavines) refreshed with a mery folishe
tale, there is none other remedy but you must let
him have it : better would I wishe it, but I cannot
helpe it. A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation

55



SIR THOMAS MORE



33 His Last Letter to his Daughter
^Margaret

OURE Lorde blesse you, good doughter, and youre
good housbande, and youre lyttle boye, and all
yours, and all my chyldren, and all my Goddechyldren
and all oure frendes. Recommende me whan ye maye,
to my good doughter Cicily, whom I beseche oure
Lorde to coumforte. And I sende her my blessyng,
and to all her children, and praye her to praye for me.
I sende her an handkercher : and God coumfort my
good sonne her husbande. My good doughter
Daunce hathe the picture in parchemente, that you
delyuered me from my ladye Coniers, her name is on
the backeside. Shewe her that I hartelye praye her,
that you may sende it in my name to her agayne, for
a token from me to praye for me. I lyke speciall
wel Dorothe Coly, I pray you be good unto her.
I woulde wytte whether thys be she that you wrote
me of. If not yet I praye you bee good to the tother,
as you maye in her affliccion, and to my good doughter
Joone Aleyn too. Geve her I praye you some kynde
aunswere, for she sued hither to me this day to pray
you be good to her. I comber you good Margaret
much, but I would be sory, if it should be any longer
than tomorow. For it is saint Thomas euen, and the
utas of saint Peter : & therfore tomorow long I to
go to God : it were a day verye mete and conuenient
for me. I never liked your maner toward me better,
than when you kissed me laste : for I love when
doughterly loue and deere charitye hath no laysure
to loke to worldlye curtesy. Fare well my dere
chylde, and pray for me, and I shall for you and all
24 Mas) octave
56



SIR THOMAS MORE



youre frendes, that we may merelye mete in heauen.
I thanke you for youre gret cost. I sende now to my
good doughter Clement her algorisme stone, and I send
her and my godsonne and all hers, Gods blessing and
myne. I praye you at time conuenient recommende
me to my good sonne John More. I liked wel his
naturall fashion. Our Lord blesse hym & his good wyfe
my louyng doughter, to whom I praye him be good
as he hathe greate cause : and that yf the lande of
myne come to his hande, he breake not my wyll
concernynge hys sister Daunce. And oure Lord
blisse Thomas and Austen and all that they shal haue.

The Workes of Sir Thomas More

MILES COVERDALE

1488-1568

34 The Hoke of Wysdome

FOR the ungodly talie and ymagin thus amonge
themselves (but not right :) The tyme of oure
life is but short and tedious, and when a man is once
gone, he hath nomore joye ner pleasure, nether knowe
we eny man that turneth agayne from death : for we
are borne of naught, and we shal be herafter as though
we had never bene. For oure breth is as a smoke in
oure nostrels, and the wordes as a sparck to move oure
herte. As for oure body, it shalbe very asshes that
are quenched, and oure soule shal vanish as the soft
ayre. Oure life shall passe awaye as the trace of a
cloude, and come to naught as the myst that is dryven
awaye with the beames of the Sonne, and put downe
with the heate therof. Oure name also shalbe for-
gotten by litle and litle, and no man shal have oure
workes in remembraunce.

3 algorisme stone) counter

57



MILES COVERDALE



For oure tyme is a very shadow that passeth awaye,
and after oure ende there is no returnynge, for it is
fast sealed, so that no man commeth agayne. Come
on therfore, let us enjoye the pleasures that there
are, and let us soone use the creature like as in youth.
We wil fyll oure selves with good wyne and oyntment,
there shal no floure of the tyme go by us. We wil
crowne oure selves with roses afore they be wythered.
There shal be no fayre medowe, but oure lust shal go
thorow it. Let every one of you be partaker of oure
volupteousnes. Let us leave some token of oure
pleasure in every place, for that is oure porcion, els
gett we nothinge. . . .

Soch thinges do the ungodly ymagin, and go astraye,
for their owne wickednes hath blynded them. As
for the misteries of God, they understonde them not :
they nether hope for the rewarde of righteousnesse,
ner regarde the worshipe that holy soules shall have.
For God created man to be undestroied, yee after
the ymage of his awne licknesse made he him. Never-
thelesse thorow envye of the devell came death in to
the worlde, and they that holde of his syde, do as he
doth.

But the soules of the righteous are in the hande
of God, and the payne of death shal not touch them.
In the sight of the unwyse they appeare to dye, and
their ende is taken for very destruccion. The waye
of the righteous is judged to be utter destruccion, but
they are in rest. And though they suffre payne
before men, yet is their hope full of immortalite.

The Boke oj Wysdome, u. 1-9, 21-4, ni. 1-4



58



THE ENGLISH LITURGY



IS49

35 Collects jrom the First Trayer Hook of
Edward VI

i. Fourth Sunday after Easter

ALMIGHTIE God, whiche doest make the myndes
JLX. of all faythfull men to be of one wil : graunt
unto thy people, that they maye loue the thyng, whiche
thou commaundest, and desyre, that whiche thou
doest promes, that emong the sondery and manifold
chaunges of the worlde, oure heartes maye surely there
bee fixed, whereas true ioyes are to be founde : through
Christe our Lorde.

h. Trinity Sunday

A LMIGHTYE and euerlastyng God, whiche haste
XX. geuen unto us thy seruauntes grace by the con-
fession of a true fayth to acknowlege the glorye of the
eternall trinitie, and in the power of the diuyne
maiestie to wurshippe the unitie : we beseche thee,
that through the stedfastnes of thys fayth, we may
euermore be defended from all aduersitie, whiche
liueste and reignest, one God, worlde without end.

iii. All Saints'' Day

ALMIGHTIE God, whiche haste lenitte together
XX. thy electe in one Communion and felowship, in
the misticall body of thy sonne Christe our Lord ;
graunt us grace so to folow thy holy Saynctes in all
virtues, and godly liuyng, that we maye come to those
unspeakeable ioyes, whiche thou hast prepared for all
them that unfaynedly loue thee : through Jesus
Christe.



59



THE ENGLISH LITURGY



iv. Collect from the Communion Office

ALMIGHTIE God, the fountayn of all wisdome,
JLX. which lenowest our necessities beefore we aske,
and our ignoraunce in asking : we beseche thee to
haue compassion upon our infirmities, and those
thynges, whiche for our unwoorthines we dare not,
and for our blindnes we cannot aske, vouchsaue to
geue us for the woorthines of thy sonne Jesu Christ
our Lorde. Amen.

tPsalms in the Version of the Cfreat Hible

v. Psalm xlv

MY heart is enditing of a good matter : I speake of
the thinges, which I haue made vnto the king.
My tonge is the pen of a ready writer. Thou art
fairer than the children of men, full of grace are thy
lippes, bicause God hath blessed thee for euer. Girde
thee with thy sweard vpon thy thigh (O thou most
mightie) according to thy worship and renowne. Good
lucke have thou with thy honour, ride on bicause of
the worde of truth, of mekenes and righteousness, &
thy right hande shall teach thee terrible thinges. Thy
arowes are very sharpe, and the people shalbe sub-
dued vnto thee, euen in the middest among the kinges
enemies. Thy seate (O God) endureth for euer : the
scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thou hast
loued righteousnes, and hated iniquitie : wherfore
God (euen thy God) hath anointed thee with the oyle
of gladnesse aboue thy fellowes. Al thy garments smel
of Mirre, Aloes and Cassia, out of the yuory palaces,
wherby they haue made thee glad. Kynges daughters
wer among thy honorable women : vpon thy right
60



THE ENGLISH LITURGY

hand did stand the Quene in a vesture of golde
(wrought about with diuers coloures.) Hearken (O
daughter) and consider : encline thyne eare : forget
also thyne own people, and thy fathers house. So
shall the kyng haue pleasure in thy beauty, for he is
thy Lord God, and worship thou hym. And the
daughter of Tyre shalbe ther with a gift lyke as the
rich also among the people shall make their supplication
before thee. The kynges daughter is all glorious
within, her clothing is of wrought golde. She shalbe
brought vnto the kyng in rayment of nedle work : the
virgins that be her felowes, shal beare her companye,
and shalbe brought vnto thee. With ioy and glad-
nesse shall they be brought, and shal enter into the
kynges palace. In stede of thy fathers thou shalt
haue children, whom thou mayest make Princes in al
landes. I wil remember thy name from one generation
to another : therfore shall the people geue thankes
vnto thee world without endc.

vi. Psalm cxxvi

WHEN the Lorde turned again the captiuitie of
Sion, then were we lyke vnto them that dreame.
Then was our mouth fylled with laughter : and our
tong with ioy. Then said they among the Heathen :
the Lord hath done great thinges for them. Yea,
the Lord hath done great thynges for vs already,
wherof we reioyce. Turne our captiuitie, O Lorde,
as the riuers in the South. They that sow in teares,
shall reape in ioye. He that now goeth in his way
weping and beareth forth good sede, shal come again
with ioy, & bring his sheaucs with him.



61



THE ENGLISH LITURGY



vii. Psalm xxiii

THE Lorde is my shepehearde : therfore can I lacke
nothing. He shall fede me in a grene pasture,
and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. He
shall conuerte my soule, and bryng me foorth in the
pathes of righteousnesse for his name sake. Yea,
though I walke through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will feare no euil : for thou art with me, thy
rod and thy staffe comfort me. Thou shalt prepare
a table before me, against them that trouble me : thou
haste anointed my hcd with oyle, and my cup shalbe
full. But thy louing kindnesse and mercy shal folow
me al the dayes of my lyfe : and I will dwell in the
house of the Lorde for euer.

vii'i. Psalm xc

10RDE, thou hast bene oure refuge from one
U generation to another. Before the mountayns
were brought foorth, or euer the earth & the worlde
were made, thou art God from euerlasting, and world
without ende. Thou turnest manne to destruction.
Agayne thou sayeste, come agayne yc chyldren of men.
For a thousand yeres in thy sight ar but as yesterday,
seing that is paste as a watche in the night. Assoone
as thou scatterest them they ar euen as a slepe, and
fade away sodeinly lyke the grasse. In the morning
it is greene & groweth vp, but in the euening it is
cut downe, dried vp and withered. For we consume
away in thy displeasure : and are afrayde at thy wrath-
full indignation. Thou hast set our misdedes before
thee, and our secrete sinnes in the lyght of thy coun-
tenaunce. For when thou art angry, al our dayes are
gone : we bryng our yeares to an end, as it were a tale
that is tolde.
62



THE ENGLISH LITURGY



The Navy Prayer

[aided to the Book of Common Prayer 1662, and probably composed by
Bishop Sanderson]

O ETERNAL Lord God, who alone spreadest
out the heavens, and rulest the raging of the
sea ; who hast compassed the waters with bounds
until day and night come to an end ; Be pleased to
receive into thy Almighty and most gratious protection
the persons of us thy servants, and the Fleet in which
we serve. Preserve us from the dangers of the sea,
and from the violence of the enemy, that we may be
a safe-guard unto our most gratious soveraign lord
King Charles and his Kingdoms, and a security for
such as pass on the seas upon their lawfull occasions ;
that the inhabitants of our Island may in peace and
quietness serve thee our God, and that we may
return in safety to enjoy the blessings of the land,
with the fruits of our labours ; and with a thankfull
remembrance of thy mercies to praise and glorifie
thy holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

THOMAS CRANMER

1489-1556

36 Uses of Holy Scripture

DOEST thou not mark, & consider how the smith,
mason, or carpenter, or any other handy craftes-
man, what nede soeuer he be in, what other shift
so euer he make, he wil not sel, nor lay to pledge
the toles of his occupation, for then how should he
worke his feate or get his liuing therby ? Of like minde
& affection ought we to be towardes holy Scripture,
for as mallets, hammers, sawes, chesils, axes, & hatchets
23 worke his feate) do his job

63



THOMAS CRANMER



be the toles of their occupation : So be the bokes of
the Prophetes, & Apostles & al holy writers inspired
by the holy ghost the instrumentes of our saluation.
Wherfore let vs not sticke to bye & prouide vs the
Bible, that is to say, the bokes of holy Scripture. And
let vs thinke that to be a better Iuel in our house
then either gold or siluer. For like as theues bene
lothe to assault an house, where they know to be good
armoure & artillary, so wheresoeuer these holy &
ghostly bokes bene occupied, there nether the deuil,
nor none of his angels dare come nere. And they
that occupy them bene in much sauegarde, & haue
a great consolation, and bene the readier vnto all
goodnesse, the slower to al euil : and if they haue done
any thing amisse anone euen by the sight of the bokes,
their consciences ben admonished, & they waxen sory
and ashamed of the facte. Preface to the Great Bible

HUGH LATIMER

1491-1555

37 Decay of the Yeomanry

MY father was a Yoman, and had no landes of hys
own, only he had a farme of iii. or iiii. pound
by yere at the uttermooste, and here upon he tilled
so much as kept halfe a dosen men. He had walke
for a hundred shepe, and my mother milked m,
kyne. He was able and did finde the kyng a harnesse,
with himselfe, and his horse, whyle he came to the
place that he shoulde receive the kynges wages. I can
remembre, that I buckled hys harnesse, when he wente
unto Blacke heathe felde. He kept me to schole, or
els I hadde not bene able to have preached before

21 walke) pasture
64



HUGH LATIMER



the iinges majesty now. He maryed my systers wyth
v. pounde, or xx. nobles a piece, so that he brought
them up in godlinesse, and fear of God. He kepte
hospitality for his pore neighboures. And some
almesse he gave to the pore, and al thys dyd he of the
said farm. Where he that now hath it, payeth xvi.
pound by yere or more, and is not able to do any thing
for his prince, for him selfe, nor for his children, or
geve a cup of drink to the pore. Thus al the enhansyng
and rearing goth to your private commodity and welth.
So that where ye had a single to much, you have that :
and sins the same, ye have enhansed the rent, and so
have encresed another to muche. So nowe ye have
double to muche, which is to to muche. But let the
precher preach til his tong be worn to the stomps,
nothing is amended. We have good statutes made for
the common wealth as touching commeners, enclosers,
many metings and sessions, but in the end of the
matter, there commeth nothing forthe. Well, well,
thys is one thing I wil say unto you, from whence it
commeth I know, even from the devd. I know his
intent in it. For if ye bring it to passe, that the
yomanry be not able to put their sonnes to schole (as
in dede universities do wondrously decay al redy) and
that they be not able to marrye theyr daughters to
the avoidynge of whoredome I say ye plucke salvation
from the people, and utterly destroye the realme. For
by yomans sonnes, the faith of Christe is, and hath
bene maintayned chieflye. Is this realme taughte by
rich mens sonnes ? No, no, read the chronicles, ye shall
finde somtime noble mennes sonnes, whych have bene
unpreaching bishops and prelates, but ye shal fynde
none of them learned men. But verily, they that
shoulde looke to the redresse of these thinges, be the
2830 d 65



HUGH LATIMER



greatest againste them. In thys realme are a great
many of folkes, and amongest many, I knowe but one
of tender zeale, at the mocyon of his pore tenauntes,
hath let down his landes to the old rentes for their
relief. For Gods love, let not him be a Phenix, let
him not be alone, let him not be an Hermite closed
in a wal, some good man folow him, and do as he
geveth example.

First Sermon preached before King Edward VI

38 Qause and Effect

AND here by the way I wyll tel you a mery toy.
„ Maister Moore was once sent in commission
into Kent, to help to try out (if it might be) what was
the cause of Goodwin sandes, and the shelfe that
stopped up Sandwich haven. Thyther commeth
maister More, and calleth the country afore him, such
as wer thought to be men of experience and men that
could of lykelyhod best certify hym of that matter
concerning the stopping of Sandwich haven. Among
others came in before hym an olde man with a white
head, and one that was thought to be lytle lesse then
an hundereth yeares olde. When maister Moore saw
thys aged man, he thought it expedient to heare hym
say hys mynd in thys matter (for being so olde a man it
was lykely that he knewe most of any man in that
presence and company.) So Maister Moore called this
old aged man unto hym, and sayd : Father (sayd he)
tel me if ye can what is the cause of thys great arising
of the sandes and shelves here about thys haven, the
which stop it up that no shippes can arive here ? Ye
are the eldest man that I can espye in al thys company,
66



HUGH LATIMER



so that it any man can tell any cause of it, ye of lykely-
hode can say most in it, or at leastwyse more then any
other man here assembled. Yea forsooth good Maister
(quod this old man) for I am wel nighe an hundreth
yeares old, and no man here in this company any
thing nere unto mine age.

Well then (quod Maister Moore) howe saye you in
thys matter f what thincke ye to be the cause of these
shelves and flattes that stoppe up Sandmche haven ?
Forsoth syr (quoth he) I am an olde man, I thyncke
that Tenterton steeple is the cause of Goodwyn sandes.
For I am an old man syr (quod he) and I may re-
member the building of Tenterton steeple, and I may
remember when there was no steeple at al there.
And before that T enterton steeple was in building,
there was no maner of speaking of any fiats or sands
that stopped the haven, and therfore I thinke that
Tenterton steple is the cause of the destroyng and
decaying of Sandwych haven. And even so to my
purpose is preaching of Gods word the cause of
rebellyon, as Tenterton steple was cause that Sandwich
haven is decayed.

Last Sermon preached before Ktng Edward VI



WILLIAM TYNDALE

1496 ?-i536

39 zA Vision of Judgement

WHEN the Sonne of Man shall come in hys
maiestie, and all hys holy angelles with him,
then shall he sytt uppon the seate of his maiestie, and
before hym shalbe gaddred all nacions. And he shall

67



WILLIAM TYNDALE



sever them won from another, as a shepherde putteth
asunder the shepe from the gootes. And he shall sett
the shepe on his right honde, and the gotes on his
lyfte honde. Then shall the Kynge saye to them on
his right honde : Come ye blessed children of my
father, inheret ye the kyngdome prepared for you
from the beginninge of the worlde. For I was an-
hongred, and ye gave me meate. I thursted, and ye
gave me drinke. I was herbroulesse, and ye lodged me.
I was naked and ye clothed me : I was sicke and ye
visited me. I was in preson and ye cam unto me.

Then shall the juste answere hym sayinge : Master,
when sawe we the anhongred, and feed the ? or a
thurst, and gave the drynke f when sawe we the
herbroulesse, and lodged the ? or naked and clothed
the ? or when sawe we the sicke, or in preson and cam
unto the ? And the Kynge shall answere, and saye
unto them : Verely I saye unto you : in as moche as
ye have done it unto won of the leest of these my
brethren : ye have done it to me.

Then shall the Kynge saye unto them that shalbe on
the lyffte hande : Departe from me, ye coursed, into
everlastinge fire, which is prepared for the devyll and
hys angels. For I was an hungred, and ye gave me
no meate. I thursted, and ye gave me no drynke. I
was herbroulesse, and ye lodged me nott. I was naked,
and ye clothed me nott. I was sycke and in preson,
and ye visited me not.

Then shall they also answere hym sayinge : Master
when sawe we the anhungred, or a thurst, or her-
broulesse, or naked, or sicke, or in preson, and have not
ministred unto the ? Then shall he answere them, and
saye : Verily I say unto you, in as moche as ye dyd
9 herbroulesse) homeless
68



WILLIAM TYNDALE



it nott to won of the leest of these, ye dyd it nott to
me. And these shall go into everlastinge payne : And
the rightous into lyfe eternall.

St. Matthew xxvi. 31-46

WILLIAM ROPER

1496-1578

40 Sir Thomas £More parts from his
Daughter ^Margaret

WHEN Sir Thomas More came from Westminster
to the Tower-witd again, his daughter, my wife,
desirous to see her father, whom she thought she
should never see in this world after, and also to have
his final blessing, gave attendance about the Tower
Wharf, where she knew he should pass by before he
could enter into the Tower. There tarrying for his
coming home, as soon as she saw him, after his blessing
upon her knees reverently received, she hastening
towards him, and without consideration or care of
herself pressing in among the midst of the throng
and company of the guard that with halberds and bills
went round about him, hastily ran to him, and there
openly in the sight of them all embraced him, took
him about the neck, and kissed him. Who well liking
her most natural and dear daughterly affection towards
him, gave her his fatherly blessing, and many godly
words of comfort besides. From whom after she was
departed, she, not satisfied with her former sight of him,
and likeone that had forgotten herself, being all ravished
with the entire love of her dear father, having respect
neither to herself nor to the press of the people and
multitude that were about him, suddenly turned back

69



WILLIAM ROPER



again, ran to him as before, took him about the neck,
and divers times together most lovingly kissed him ; and
at last, with a full heavy heart, was feign to depart from
him, the beholding whereof was to many of them that
were present thereat so lamentable, that it made them
for very sorrow thereof to mourn and weep.

The Life of Sir Thomas More

EDWARD HALL

d 1547

41 The Snd of the T^rekers

IN this busie season, the aventurers hearing what
the horsemen on their parties had done, and in
especial perceivyngthat the English horsemen had taken
good prisoners, commoned emongest themselfes, what
was to be done : then one of their capitaynes said
openly : Sirs, you se how long we have bene here,
and wages we have none, our living riseth on the gaine
of our enemies, and syth our beginnynge we have
had good chaunce in all our enterprises, God be
thanked : nowe the Winter draweth nere, let us now
aventure to get som good botie, to make us mery
with in the cold wether, and yf you wyl we shall
enterpryse a thing that I truste to us shalbee profitable.
Then all the compaignie cried furlhe furth. Then
wyth a banner of sainct George, they marched toward
a vyllage, liyng towarde Mustrel, having onely xxv.
light horsemen, to be their skourers, and they were
not fully two hundred men. This compaigny folowing
their skourers, went farre on, and had gotten a faire
botie of oxen, kine, and other beastial, and were
nere at their returne : and by chaunce the same day
20 furthe/urth) forth forth 26 beastial) live stock

70



EDWARD HALL



was the erle of Dammartin, and the captayn of
Mustrel, with the power of the duke of Vandosme,
goyng towarde sainct Omers to burne and destroy
that countrey, and for that purpose thei had gathered
together xv. C. horsemen, and viii. C. footmen, how
be it, the footmen were a large myle behind the
horsemen.

The Frenchmen on horsebacke espyed the English
horsemen, which perceiving the great nomber fled,
and as the said Frenchmen marched forward, they
espyed the aventurers on foote, and made toward
them : the Englishmen, seing the great nomber of the
horsemen, studied to get some hedge or stronge place
to fortifie theim, but there was no suche place in sight,
and also they had no suche tyme so to do, wherefore
the captayne sayed : Good felowes and brethren, we
have of long time bene called aventurers, now is the
tyme come of our aventure. The Frenchmen wyll not
raunsome us for no thing, we be emongst them so
feared : if any thing save our lyves, it must be God
and our hardines, and therfore, sayd he, if you se me
begin to flie, slaye me out of hande. Then every man
cryed God mercie, and kneled downe and kissed the
earth, and strake handes eche wyth other, in token
not to depart, and then made themselfes prest to the
defence.

The Frenchmen came on on every sydc, the English-
men shot their arrowes, and defended them as wel as
they could. The Frenchmen perceiving that the
Englishmen kept themselfes so close, caused diverse
of the horse men to lyght a-fote, and so they dyd, and
fought wyth their speres against the pikes, and shote
wyth Crossebowes on every syde. Alas the while ! for

25 presl) ready

7i



EDWARD HALL



while the Englyshmen had arrowes to shote, they
were not broken, but close wythout peryl ; but when
their arrowes were spent, the Englyshmen fought
valiauntly, and slew many Frenchmen that lyghted
on foote, but in the conclusion the horsemen entered,
and killed them all in maner, because there were so
many of their compaignie slain, and toke fewe of them
prisoners. This was the end of these compaignions,
called the Krekers or aventurers, which were as hardie
men, as ever served prince or captain.

The Lives of the Kings

SIR THOMAS ELYOT

1499 '-1546

42 Of Qooks and Tutors

A GENTLEMAN, ere he take a cook in his service,
. he will first examine him diligently, how many
sorts of meats, potages, and sauces he can perfectly
make, and how well he can season them, that they
may be both pleasant and nourishing. Yea, and if
it be but a falconer, he will scrupulously inquire what
skill he hath in feeding, called diet, and keeping of
his hawk from all sickness, also how he can reclaim her
and prepare her to flight. And to such a cook or
falconer, whom he findeth expert, he spareth not to
give much wages with other bounteous rewards. But
of a schoolmaster, to whom he will commit his child
to be fed with learning and instructed in virtue, whose
life shall be the principal monument of his name and
honour, he never maketh further inquiry but where
he may have a schoolmaster, and with how little
charge. And jf one be perchance founden well
learned, which will not take pains to teach without

18 reclaim her) train her to come to call
72



SIR THOMAS ELYOT

great salary, he then speaketh nothing more, or else
saith, What, shall so much wages be given to a school-
master, which would keep me two servants ? to whom
may be said these words, that by his son being well
learned he shall receive more commodity and also
worship than by the service of a hundred cooks and
falconers.

The Book named the Governor

GEORGE CAVENDISH

1500-1561

43 The Death of Wolsey

AFTER that he was in his confession the space of
. an hour. And then Master Kingston came to
him and bid him good morrow, and asked him how
he did. Sir, quoth he, I watch but God's pleasure to
render up my poor soul to him. I pray you have me
heartily commended unto his Royal Majesty, and
beseech him on my behalf to call to his Princely
remembrance all matters that have been between
us from the beginning and the progress ; and especially
between good Queen Katherine and him, and then
shall his Grace's Conscience know whether I have
offended him or not.

He is a Prince of a most Royal carriage, and hath
a Princely heart, and rather than he will miss or want
any part of his will, he will endanger the one half
of his Kingdom.

I do assure you I have often kneeled before him,
sometimes three hours together, to perswade him from
his will and appetite, but could not prevail. And,
Master Kingston, had I but served God as diligently
as I have served the King, he would not have given

73



GEORGE CAVENDISH



me over in my grey hairs. But this is the just reward
that I must receive for my diligent pains and study,
not regarding my service to. God, but only to my
Prince. Therefore let me advise you, if you be one
of the Privy Council, as by your wisdom you are fit,
take heed what you put in the King's head, for you
can never put it out again. . . .

Master Kingston, farewell ; I wish all things may
have good success. My time draws on ; I may not
tarry with you. I pray you remember my words.

Now began the time to draw near, for he drew his
speech at length, and his tongue began to fail him,
his eyes perfectly set in his head, his sight failed him.
Then we began to put him in mind of Christ's passion,
and caused the Yeoman of the Guard to stand by
privately to see him die, and bear witness of his words
and his departure, who heard all his communications.

And then presently the clock struck eight, at which
time he gave up the Ghost, and thus departed he
this life, one of us looking upon another, supposing
he prophesied of his departure.

The Ltfe and Death of Thomas Wolsey

JOHN KNOX

1505-1572

44 Regiment of Women

TO promote a woman to bear rule, superiority,
dominion, or empire above any realm, nation,
or city, is repugnant to nature, contumely to God,
a thing most contrarious to his revealed will and
approved ordinance ; and finally, it is the subversion
of good order, of all equity and justice.
74



JOHN KNOX

In the probation of this proposition, I will not be
so curious as to gather whatsoever may amplify, set
forth, or decore the same ; but I am purposed, even
as I have spoken my conscience in most plain and few
words, so to stand content with a simple proof of
every member, bringing in for my witness God's
ordinance in nature, his plain will revealed in his
word, and the minds of such as be most ancient
amongst godly writers.

And first, where that I affirm the empire of a woman
to be a thing repugnant to nature, I mean not only
that God by the order of his creation hath spoiled
woman of authority and dominion, but also that man
hath seen, proved and pronounced just causes why
that it should be. Man, I say, in many other cases
blind, doth in this behalf see very clearly. For the
causes be so manifest, that they cannot be hid. For
who can deny but it repugncth to nature that the
blind shall be appointed to lead and conduct such as
do see f That the weak, the sick, and impotent persons
shall nourish and keep the whole and strong, and
finally, that the foolish, mad and phrenetic shall
govern the discreet and give counsel to such as be
sober of mind ? And such be all women, compared
unto man in bearing of authority. For their sight
in civil regiment is but blindness, their strength weak-
ness, their counsel foolishness, and judgement frenzy,
if it be rightly considered.

I except such as God, by singular privilege, and for
certain causes known only to himself, hath exempted
from the common rank of women, and do speak of
women as nature and experience do this day declare
them. Nature, I say, doth paint them forth to be
weak, frail, impatient, feeble and foolish ; and

75



JOHN KNOX

experience hath declared them to be unconstant,
variable, cruel and lacking the spirit of counsel and
regiment. And these notable faults have men in all
ages espied in that kind, for the which not only they
have removed women from rule and authority, but
also some have thought that men subject to the counsel
or empire of their wives were unworthy of all public
office. . .

I am not ignorant that the subtle wits of carnal men
(which can never be brought under the obedience of
God's simple precepts to maintain this monstrous
empire) have yet two vain shifts. First, they allege
that, albeit women may not absolutely reign by them-
selves, because they may neither sit in judgement,
neither pronounce sentence, neither execute any public
office, yet may they do all such things by their lieu-
tenants, deputies and judges substitute. Secondarily,
say they, a woman born to rule over any realm may
choose her a husband, and to him she may transfer
and give her authority and right. To both I answer
in few words. First, that from a corrupt and venomed
fountain can spring no wholesome water. Secondarily
that no person hath power to give the thing which doth
not justly appertain to themselves. But the authority
of a woman is a corrupted fountain, and therefore
from her can never spring any lawful officer. She
is not born to rule over men, and therefore she can
appoint none by her gift, nor by her power (which
she hath not), to the place of a lawful magistrate.

The First Blast of the Trumpet against the monstrous
Re%tmenl of Women



76



ROGER ASCHAM

1515-1568

45 Seeing the Wind

TO see the wind, with a man his eyes, it is impossible,
the nature of it is so fine, and subtle, yet this
experience of the wind had I once myself, and that was
in the great snow that fell four years ago : I rode
in the highway betwixt Topclijfe-upon-Swale, and
Borowe Bridge, the way being somewhat trodden
afore, by wayfaring men. The fields on both sides
were plain and lay almost yard deep with snow, the
night afore had been a little frost, so that the snow
was hard and crusted above. That morning the sun
shone bright and clear, the wind was whistling aloft,
and sharp according to the time of the year. The
snow in the highway lay loose and trodden with
horse feet : so as the wind blew, it took the loose
snow with it, and made it so slide upon the snow in
the field which was hard and crusted by reason of
the frost overnight, that thereby I might see very well,
the whole nature of the wind as it blew that day. And
I had a great delight and pleasure to mark it, which
maketh me now far better to remember it. Some-
time the wind would be not past two yards broad,
and so it would carry the snow as far as I could see.
Another time the snow would blow over half the field
at once. Sometime the snow would tumble softly,
by and by it would fly wonderfull fast. And this
I perceived also that the wind goeth by streams and
not whole together. For I should see one stream
within a score on me, then the space of two score no
snow would stir, but after so much quantity of ground,
another stream of snow at the same very time should
28 score) twenty paces

77



ROGER ASCHAM

be carried likewise, but not equally. For the one
would stand still when the other flew apace, and so
continue sometime swiftlier, sometime slowlier, some-
time broader, sometime narrower, as far as I could
see. Nor it flew not straight, but sometime it crooked
this way sometime that way, and sometime it ran
round about in a compass. And sometime the snow
would be lift clean from the ground up into the
air, and by and by it would be all clapped to the
ground as though there had been no wind at all,
straightway it would rise and fly again.

And that which was the most marvel of all, at one
time two drifts of snow flew, the one out of the West
into the East, the other out of the North into the
East : And I saw two winds by reason of the snow the
one cross over the other, as it had been two highways.
And again I should hear the wind blow in the air,
when nothing was stirred at the ground. And when
all was still where I rode, not very far from me the
snow should be lifted wonderfully. This experience
made me more marvel at the nature of the wind,
than it made me cunning in the knowledge of the
wind : but yet thereby I learned perfectly that it is
no marvel at all though men in a wind lose their length
in shooting, seeing so many ways the wind is so
variable in blowing.

Toxopfolus

46 From the Treface to ' The Schoolmaster '

AFTER dinner I went up to read with the Queen's
_/jL Majesty. We read then together in the Greek
tongue, as I well remember, that noble Oration of
Demosthenes against Eschines, for his false dealing in
78



ROGER ASCHAM



his Embassage to King Philip of Macedony. Sir Rich.
Sackvtlle came up soon after, and finding me in her
Majesty's privy Chamber, he took me by the hand, and
carrying me to a Window, said :

' Mr. Ascham, I would not for a good deal of Money
have been this day absent from dinner. Where, though
I said nothing, yet I gave as good Ear, and do consider
as well the Talk that passed, as any one did there.
Mr. Secretary said very wisely, and most truly, that
many young Wits be driven to hate Learning before
they know what Learning is. I can be good witness to
this myself ; for a fond Schoolmaster, before I was fully
fourteen year old, drave me so with fear of Beating
from all Love of Learning, as now, when I know what
difference it is to have Learning and to have little
or none at all, I feel it my greatest Grief, and find it
my greatest Hurt that ever came to me, that it was
my so ill chance to light upon so lewd a Schoolmaster.
But seeing it is but in vain to lament things past,
and also Wisdom to look to things to come, surely,
God willing, if God lend me Life, I will make this my
mishap some Occasion of good hap to little Robert
Sackvtlle, my son's son. For whose bringing up
I would gladly, if it so please you, use specially your
good advice. I hear say you have a son much of his
age ; we will deal thus together. Point you out a
Schoolmaster, who by your Order shall teach my Son
and yours, and for all the rest I will provide, yea,
though they three do cost me a couple of hundred
pounds by year ; and beside, you shall find me as
fast a Friend to you and yours, as perchance any you
have.' Which Promise the worthy Gentleman surely
kept with me until his dying day.

The Schoolmaster
79



ROGER ASCHAM



47 Lady Jane Qrey

BEFORE I went into Germany, I came to Brodegate
1 in Leicestershire, to take my Leave of that noble
Lady Jane Grey, to whom I was exceeding much
beholding. Her Parents, the Duke and Duchess, with
all the Household, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen,
were hunting in the Park. I found her in her Chamber
reading Phaedon Platonis in Greek, and that with as
much Delight as some Gentlemen would read a merry
Tale in Boccace. After Salutation, and Duty done,
with some other Talk, I asked her, why she would lose
such Pastime in the Park? Smiling, she answered me :
' I-wis, all their Sport in the Park is but a Shadow
to that Pleasure that I find in Plato. Alas ! good Folk,
they never felt what true Pleasure meant. And how came
you, Madam, quoth I, to this deep Knowledge of Pleasure?
And what did chiefly allure you unto it, seeing not many
W omen, but very few Men, have attained thereunto ?
I will tell you, quoth she, and tell you a Truth which
perchance ye will marvel at. One of the greatest Benefits
that ever God gave me, is, that he sent me so sharp and
severe Parents, and so gentle a Schoolmaster. For when
I am in Presence either of father or mother, whether
I speak, keep Silence, sit, stand, or go, eat, drink, be
merry, or sad, be sewing, playing, dancing, or doing any-
thing else, I must do it, as it were, in such Weight,
Measure, and Number, even so perfectly, as God made
the World ; or else I am so sharply taunted, so cruelly
threatened, yea, presently sometimes with Pinches, Nips,
and Bobs, and other ways (which I will not name for the
Honour I bear them) so without measure misordered, that
1 think myself in Hell, till Time come that I must go to
Master Elmer ; who teacheth me so gently, so pleasantly,
8o



ROGER ASCHAM



with such fair Allurements to Learning, that I think all
the Time nothing, while I am with him. And when I am
called jrom him, I fall on weeping, because whatsoever
I do else but Learning is full of Grief, Trouble, Fear,
and whole misliking unto me. And thus my Book hath
been so much my Pleasure, and hringeth daily to me more
Pleasure and more, that in respect of it, all other Pleasures
in very deed, be but Trifles and Troubles unto me.

The Schoolmaster

48 Of Translation

I HAVE been a looker on in the Cockpit of Learning
these many Years ; and one Cock only have I
known, which with one Wing even at this day doth
pass all other, in mine Opinion, that ever I saw in any
Pit in England, though they had two Wings. Yet
nevertheless, to fly well with one Wing, to run fast
with one Leg, be rather rare Masteries much to be
marvelled at, than sure Examples safely to be followed.
A Bishop that now liveth, a good man, whose Judge-
ment in Religion I better like, than his Opinion in
Perfectness in other Learning, said once unto me :
' We have no Need now of the Greek Tongue, when all
things be translated into Latin.' But the good man
understood not that even the best Translation is
for mere Necessity but an evil imped Wing to fly withal,
or a heavy Stump Leg of Wood to go withal. Such,
the higher they fly, the sooner they falter and fail :
the faster they run, the ofter they stumble, and sorer
they fall. Such as will needs so fly, may flie at a Pie,
and catch a Daw : and such Runners, as commonly
they shove and shoulder to stand foremost, yet in
23 imped) grafted

81



ROGER ASCHAM



the end they come behind others, and deserve but the
Hopshackles, if the Masters of the Game be right
Judgers.

The Schoolmaster

JOHN FOXE

1516-1587

49 1(gwland Taylor, Vicar of Hadleigh,
Suffolk

Arrested in London. Burned on Aldbam Common tn his own
Parish, Feb. 8, 1555

NOW when the Sheriff and his company came
against St. Botolph's Church, Elizabeth cried,
saying, ' O my dear Father ! Mother ! mother ! here
is my father led away.' Then cried his wife, ' Rowland,
Rowland, where art thou ? ' — for it was a very dark
morning, that the one could not well see the other.
Dr. Taylor answered, ' Dear wife, I am here,' and
stayed. The Sheriff's men would have led him forth,
but the Sheriff said, ' Stay a little, masters, I pray you,
and let him speak with his wife,' and so they stayed.
Then came she to him, and he took his daughter Mary
in his arms, and he, his wife and Elizabeth kneeled down
and said the Lord's Prayer. At which sight the Sheriff
wept apace, and so did divers other of the company.
After they had prayed he rose up and kissed his wife
and shook her by the hand, and said, ' Farewell, my
dear wife, be of good comfort, for I am quiet in my
conscience. God shall stir up a father for my children.'
. . . Then said his wife, ' God be with thee, dear
Rowland. I will with God's grace meet thee at

2 Hopshackles) hobbles
82



JOHN FOXE



Hadleigh.' . . . All the way Dr. Taylor was joyful and
merry as one that accounted himself going to a most
pleasant banquet or bridal. . . . Coming within a two
mile of Hadleigh he desired to light off his horse,
which done he leaped and set a frisk or twain, as men
commonly do in dancing. ' Why, master Doctor,'
quoth the Sheriff, ' how do you now ? ' He answered,
' Well, God be praised, good master Sheriff, never
better ; for now I know I am almost at home. I lack
not past two stiles to go over, and I am even at my
Father's house.'

Acts and Monuments

THOMAS WILSON

1525 ?-i58i

50 ' Inkhorn Terms '

AMONG all other lessons this should first be learned,
±\. that we never affect any strange inkhorn terms,
but so speak as is commonly received, neither seeking
to be over fine, nor yet living over careless, using our
speech as most men do, and ordering our wits as the
fewest have done. Some seek so far for outlandish
English, that they forget altogether their mother's
language. And I dare swear this, if some of their
mothers were alive, they were not able to tell what they
say; and yet these fine English clerks will say, they
speak in their mother-tongue if a man should charge
them for counterfeiting the King's English. Some
far-journeyed gentlemen at their return home, like
as they love to go in foreign apparel, so they will powder
their talk with oversea language. He that cometh
lately out of France will talk French English and never
blush at the matter. Another chops in with English

83



THOMAS WILSON



Italienated, and applieth the Italiap phrase to our
English speaking, the which is, as if an Orator that
professeth to utter his mind in plain Latin, would
needs speak Poetry, and far-fetched colours of strange
antiquity. The Lawyer will store his stomach with
the prating of Pedlars. The Auditor in making his
accompt and reckoning, cometh in with sise sould, and
cater denere, for vis. iiii*/. The fine courtier will talk
nothing but Chaucer. The mystical wisemen and
Poetical Clerks will speak nothing but quaint Proverbs,
and blind Allegories, delighting much in their own
darkness, especially, when none can tell what they do
say. The unlearned or foolish fantastical, that smells
but of learning (such fellows as have seen learned men
in their days) will so Latin their tongues, that the simple
cannot but wonder at their talk, and think surely they
speak by some Revelation. I know them that think
Rhetoric to stand wholly upon dark words, and he that
can catch an inkhorn term by the tail, him they count
to be a fine Englishman, and a good Rhetorician.

The Art of Rhetorique

RALPH ROBINSON

fl- 1551

57 c B^lph Hythlodaye

WHILES I was there abiding oftentimes among
other, but which to me was more welcome than
any other, did visit me one Peter Giles, a Citizen of
Antwerp, a man there in his country of honest
reputation, and also preferred to high promotions,
worthy truely of the highest. For it is hard to say
whether the young man be in learning or in honesty
more excellent. For he is both of wonderfull virtuous
84



RALPH ROBINSON

conditions, and also singularly well learned, and
towards all sorts of people exceeding gentle ; but
towards his friends so kind hearted, so loving, so faithful,
so trusty, and of so earnest affection, that it were very
hard in any place to find a man that with him in all
points of friendship may be compared. No man can
be more lowly or courteous. No man useth less
simulation or dissimulation ; in no man is more
prudent simplicity. Besides this, he is in his talk
and communication so merry and pleasant, yea, and
that without harm, that through his gentle enter-
tainment and his sweet and delectable communication
in me was greatly abated and diminished the fervent
desire that I had to see my native country, my wife,
and my children ; whom then I did much long and
covet to see, because that at that time I had been
more than iv Months from them.

Upon a certain day when I was hearing the divine
service in our Ladies Church, which is the fairest, the
most gorgeous and curious church of building in all
the city, and also most frequented of people, and when
the divine service was done, was ready to go home to my
lodging, I chanced to espy this forsaid Peter talking
with a certain Stranger, a man well stricken in age,
with a black sun-burned face, a long beard, and a cloak
cast homely about his shoulders ; whom by his favour
and apparel forthwith I judged to be a mariner. But
when this Peter saw me, he cometh unto me and saluteth
me. And as I was about to answer him : ' see you
this man ? ' saith he (and therewith he pointed to the
man that I saw him talking with before). ' I was
minded,' quoth he, ' to bring him straight home to
you.' ' He should have been very welcome to me,'
said I, ' for your sake.' ' Nay ' (quoth he), ' for his

8 S



RALPH ROBINSON



own sake, if you knew him ; for there is no man this
day living that can tell you of so many strange and
unknown peoples and countries as this man can. And
I know well that you be very desirous to hear of such
news.' ' Then I conjectured not far a miss ' (quoth I),
' for even at the first sight I judged him to be a
mariner.' ' Nay ' (quoth he), ' there ye were greatly
deceived. He hath sailed indeed, not as the mariner
Pahnure, but as the expert and prudent Prince
Ulysses ; yea, rather as the ancient and sage Philosopher
Plato.

' For this same Raphael Hythlodaye (for this is
his name) is very well learned in the Latin tongue ;
but profound and excellent in the Greek tongue,
wherein he ever bestowed more study than in the Latin,
because he had given himself wholly to the study of
Philosophy. Whereof he knew that there is nothing
extant in the Latin tongue that is to any purpose,
saving a few of Seneca's and Ctcero's doings. His
patrimony that he was born unto he left to his brethren
(for he is a Portugal born) ; and for the desire that
he had to see and know the far Countries of the
world, he joined himself in company with Amerike
V espuce, and in the iii last voyages of those iv, that
be now in print and abroad in every man's hands,
he continued still in his company, saving that in
the last voyage he came not home again with him.
For he made such means and shift, what by entreatance
and what by importune suit, that he got licence
of master Amerike (though it were sore against his
will) to be one of the xxiv which in the end of the
last voyage were left in the country of Guhke. He
was therefore left behind for his mind's sake, as
one that took more thought and care for travelling
86



RALPH ROBINSON



than dying ; having customably in his mouth these
sayings : He that hath no grave is covered with the
sky ; and, the way to heaven out of all places is of
like length and distance. Which fantasy of his (if
God had not been his better friend) he had surely
bought full dear.

' But after the departing of Master Vespuce, when
he had travelled through and about many Countries,
with five of his companions Guhkians, at the last by
marvellous chance he arrived in Taprobane, from
whence he went to Calicut, where he chanced to find
certain of his Country ships, wherein he returned
again into his Country, nothing less than looked for.'

All this when Peter had told me, I thanked him
for his gentle kindness, that he had vouchsafed to
bring me to the speech of that man, whose communica-
tion he thought should be to me pleasant and accept-
able. And therewith I turned me to Raphael; and
when we had haylsede the one the other, and had spoken
these common words, that be customably spoken at
the first meeting and acquaintance of strangers, we
went thence to my house, and there in my garden
upon a bench covered with green turfs we sat down
talking togethers.

More's Utopia

SIR THOMAS NORTH

1535 ?-i6oi ?

52 Qoriolanus at the Hearth of zAujidius

IT was even twilight when he entered the city of
Antium, and many people met him in the streets,
but no man knew him. So he went directly to Tullus
19 haylsede) hailed

87



SIR THOMAS NORTH



Aufidius' house, and when he came thither, he got
him up straight to the chimney hearth, and sat him
down, and spake not a word to any man, his face all
muffled over. They of the house, spying him, wondered
what he should be, and yet they durst not bid him
rise. For ill-favouredly muffled and disguised as he
was, yet there appeared a certain majesty in his
countenance, and in his silence : whereupon they went
to Tullus, who was at supper, to tell him of the strange
disguising of this man. Tullus rose presently from the
board, and coming towards him, asked him what he
was, and wherefore he came. Then Martius unmuffled
himself, and after he had paused a while, making no
answer, he said unto him. ' If thou knowest me not
yet, Tullus, and seeing me dost not perhaps believe
me to be the man I am indeed, I must of necessity
bewray myself to be that I am. I am Cams Martius,
who hath done to thyself particularly, and to all the
Volsces generally, great hurt and mischief, which
I cannot deny for my surname of Conolanus that I
bear. For I never had other benefit nor recompence
of all the true and painful service I have done, and the
extreme dangers I have been in, but this only surname :
a good memory and witness of the malice and dis-
pleasure thou shouldst bear me. Indeed the name only
remaineth with me : for the rest the envy and cruelty
of the people of Rome have taken from me, by the
sufferance of the dastardly nobility and magistrates,
who have forsaken me and let me be banished by the
people. This extremity hath now driven me to come
as a poor suitor to take thy chimney hearth, not of
any hope I have to save my life thereby. For if I
had feared death, I would not have come hither to
have put my life in hazard : but pricked forward with
88



SIR THOMAS NORTH

spite and desire I have to be revenged of them that thus
have banished me, whom now I do begin to be avenged
on, putting my person into the hands of their enemies.
Wherefore, if thou hast any heart to be wracked of the
injuries thy enemies have done thee, speed thee now,
and let my misery serve thy turn, and so use it, as my
service may be a benefit to the Volsces : promising
thee, that I will fight with better good-will for all you,
than I did when I was against you, knowing that
they fight more valiantly, who know the force of the
enemy, than such as have never proved it. And if it
be so that thou dare not, and that thou art weary to
prove fortune any more, then am I also weary to live
any longer. And it were no wisdom in thee to save
the life of him, who hath been heretofore thy mortal
enemy, and whose service now can nothing help nor
pleasure thee.' Tullus, hearing what he said, was
a marvellous glad man, and, taking him by the hand,
he said unto him, ' Stand up, O Marttus, and be of
good cheer, for in proffering thyself unto us thou dost
us great honour : and by this means thou mayest hope
also of greater things at all the Volsces' hands.' So
he feasted him for that time, and entertained him in
the honourablest manner he could, talking with him
in no other matters at that present.

Plutarch's Ltves of the Noble Grecians and Romans

53 Qleopatra comes to nAntony

FOR Caesar and Pompey knew her when she was
but a young thing, and knew not then what the
world meant : but now she went to Antonius at the
age when a woman's beauty is at the prime, and she
also of best judgement. So she furnished herself with

89



SIR THOMAS NORTH



a world of gifts, store of gold and silver, and of riches
and other sumptuous ornaments, as is credible enough
she might bring from so great a house, and from so
wealthy and rich a realm as Egypt was. But yet she
carried nothing with her wherein she trusted more than
in herself, and in the charms and enchantment of her
passing beauty and grace. Therefore when she was
sent unto by divers letters, both from Antonius him-
self, and also from his friends, she made so light of it
and mocked Antonius so much, that she disdained to
set forward otherwise, but to take her barge in the
river of Cydnus ; the poop whereof was of gold, the
sails of purple, and the oars of silver, which kept stroke
in rowing after the sound of the musicke of flutes,
howboys, citherns, viols, and such other instruments
as they played upon in the barge. And now for the
person of herself : she was laid under a pavilion of
cloth of gold of tissue, apparelled and attired like the
goddess Venus commonly drawn in picture : and hard
by her, on either hand of her, pretty fair boys apparelled
as Painters do set forth god Cupid, with little fans
in their hands, with the which they fanned wind upon
her. Her Ladies and Gentlewomen also, the fairest of
them were apparelled like the Nymphs Neretds (which
are the Mermaids of the waters) and like the Graces,
some steering the helm, others tending the tackle and
ropes of the barge, out of the which there came a
wonderful passing sweet savour of perfumes, that
perfumed the wharf's side, pestered with innumerable
multitudes of people. Some of them followed the
barge all alongst the river-side : others also ran out
of the city to see her coming in. So that in the end
there ran such multitudes of people one after another
to see her, that Antonius was left post alone in the
90



SIR THOMAS NORTH



market-place in his Imperial seat to give audience :
and there went a rumour in the people's mouths, that
the goddess Venus was come to play with the god
Bacchus, for the general good of all Asia.

Plutarch's Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans

SIR THOMAS BODLEY

1545-1613

54 His Letter to the Vice-Qhancellor

SIR, although you know me not, as I suppose, yet
for the furthering of an offer, of evident utility,
to your whole University, I will not be too scrupulous
in craving your assistance. I have been always of
a mind that if God, of his goodness, should make me
able to do anything for the benefit of posterity, I
would show some token of affection that I have
evermore borne to the studies of good Learning.
I know my portion is too slender to perform, for the
present, any answerable act to my willing disposition :
but yet, to notify some part of my desire in that
behalf, I have resolved thus to deal. Where there
hath been heretofore a public library in Oxford, which,
you know, is apparent by the room itself remaining,
and by your statute Records, I will take the charge
and cost upon me, to reduce it again to his former
use : and to make it fit, and handsome with seats, and
shelves, and desks, and all that may be needful to
stir up other men's benevolence to help to furnish it
with books. And this I purpose to begin, as soon as
timber can be gotten, to the intent that you may reap
some speedy Profit of my Project. And where before,
as I conceive, it was to be reputed but a store of
books of diverse benefactors, because it never had any

91



SIR THOMAS BODLEY



lasting allowance, for augmentation of the Number,
or supply of Books decayed : whereby it came to
pass that when those that were in being were either
wasted or embezzled, the whole Foundation came to
ruin : to meet with that inconvenience, I will so
provide hereafter (if God do not hinder my present
design) as you shall be still assured of a standing annual
rent, to be disbursed every year in buying of books,
in officers' stipends, and other pertinent occasions,
with which provision, and some order for preservation
of the place, and of the furniture of it, from accustomed
abuses, it may perhaps in time to come prove a notable
Treasure for the multitude of volumes, an excellent
benefit for the use and ease of students, and a singular
ornament in the University. . . Which is now as much
as I can think on, whereunto, at your good leisure,
I would request your friendly answer. And if it lie
in my ability to deserve your pains in that behalf,
although we be not yet acquainted, you shall find me
very forward. From London, Feb. 23, 1597.

Your Affectionate friend,

Tho: Bodley.

Letter to the V ice-Chancellor of Oxon. about restoring
the Pubhc Library

WILLIAM CAMDEN

1551-1623

55 The Lady of the Sea

FOR the air is most temperate and wholesome, sited
in the midst of the temperate Zone, subject to no
storms and tempests as the more Southern and
Northern are ; but stored with infinite delicate fowl.
For water, it is walled and guarded with the Ocean
most commodious for traffick to all parts of the world,
9a



WILLIAM CAMDEN



and watered with pleasant fishfull and navigable
rivers, which yield safe havens and roads, and furnished
with shipping and Sailors, that it may rightly be
termed the Lady of the Sea. That I may say nothing
of healthful Baths, and of Meres stored both with
fish and fowl ; the earth fertile of all kind of grain,
manured with good husbandry, rich in mineral of
coals, tin, lead, copper, not without gold and silver,
abundant in pasture, replenished with cattle both
tame and wild (for it hath more parks than all Europe
besides), plentifully wooded, provided with all com-
plete provisions of War, beautified with many populous
Cities, fair Boroughs, good Towns, and well-built
Villages, strong Munitions, magnificent Palaces of
the Prince, stately houses of the Nobility, frequent
Hospitals, beautiful Churches, fair Colleges, as well
in other places, as in the two Universities, which are
comparable to all the rest in Christendom, not only in
antiquity, but also in learning, buildings, and endow-
ments. As for government Ecclesiastical and Civil,
which is the very soul of a kingdom, I need to say
nothing, when as I write to home-born, and not to
Strangers. Remaines concerning Britain

RAPHAEL HOLINSHED

fl- 1578

56 The Weird Sisters

SHORTLY after happened a strange and uncouth
wonder, which afterward was the cause of much
trouble in the realm of Scotland, as ye shall after
hear. It fortuned as Makbeth and Banquho journeyed
towards Fores, where the king as then lay, they went
sporting by the way together without other company
save only themselves, passing through the woods and

<3%



RAPHAEL HOLINSHED



fields, when suddenly in the middest of a laund, there
met them three women in strange and ferly apparel,
resembling creatures of an elder world, whom when
they attentively beheld, wondering much at the sight,
the first of them spake and said : — ' All hail Makbeth,
Thane of Glammis ' (for he had lately entered into
that dignity and office by the death of his father
SinelJ). The second of them said : — ' Hail Makbeth,
Thane of Cauider.'' But the third said : — ' All hail
Makbeth, that hereafter shalt be King of Scotland.''

Then Banquho : ' What manner of women (saith
he) are you that seem so little favourable unto me,
whereas to my fellow here, besides high offices, ye
assign also the kingdom, appointing forth nothing for
me at all ? ' ' Yes ' (saith the first of them), 4 we
promise greater benefits unto thee than unto him ; for
he shall reign indeed, but with an unlucky end ; neither
shall he leave any issue behind him to succeed in his
place, where contranly thou indeed shalt not reign at
all, but of thee those shall be born which shall govern
the Scottish kingdom by long order of continual
descent.' Herewith the foresaid women vanished
immediately out of their sight. This was reputed
at the first but some vain fantastical illusion by
Makbeth and Banquho, insomuch that Banquho
would call Makbeth in jest, king of Scotland ; and
Makbeth again would call him in sport likewise, father
of many kings. But afterwards the common opinion
was, that these women were either the weird sisters,
that is (as ye would say) the Goddesses of destiny, or
else some Nymphs or Fairies, indued with knowledge
of prophecy by their Necromantical science, because
everything came to pass as they had spoken.

History of Scotland

I laund) lawn, open turf 2 ferly) marvellous
94



RICHARD HAKLUYT

1552 ?-i6i6

57 The First Landing in Virginia

The First Voyage made to the coasts of America, with
two barks, wherein were Captains Master PHILIP
AMADAS, and Master ARTHUR BARLOW, who
discovered part of the country now called Virginia,
Anno 1584.

THE second of July we found shoal water, which
smelt so sweetly, and was so strong a smell, as if we
had been in the midst of some delicate garden, abound-
ing with all kinds of odoriferous flowers ; by which we
were assured that the land could not be far distant.
And keeping good watch and bearing but slack sail,
the fourth of the same month we arrived upon the
coast, which we supposed to be a continent and firm
land, and we sailed along the same 120 English miles
before we could find any entrance, or river issuing
into the Sea. The first that appeared unto us we
entered, though not without some difficulty, and cast
anchor about three arquebus-shot within the haven's
mouth, on the left hand of the same ; and after thanks
given to God for our safe arrival thither, we manned
our boats, and went to view the land next adjoining,
and to take possession of the same in the right of the
Queen's most excellent Majesty, as rightful Queen
and Princess of the same, and after delivered the same
over to your use, according to her Majesty's grant and
letters patents, under her Highness's great Seal.
Which being performed, according to the ceremonies
used in such enterprises, we viewed the land about us,
being, whereas we first landed, very sandy and low
towards the water side, but so full of grapes as the

95



RICHARD HAKLUYT



very beating and surge of the sea overflowed them.
Of which we found such plenty, as well there as in all
places else, both on the sand and on the green soil
on the hills, as in the plains, as well on every little
shrub, as also climbing towards the tops of high
Cedars, that I think in all the world the like abundance
is not to be found : and myself having seen those
parts of Europe that most abound, find such difference
as were incredible to be written.

We passed from the sea side towards the tops of
those hills next adjoining, being but of mean height ;
and from thence we beheld the Sea on both sides, to
the North and to the South, finding no end any of
both ways. This land lay stretching itself to the West,
which after we found to be but an Island of twenty
leagues long, and not above six miles broad. Under
the bank or hill whereon we stood, we beheld the
valleys replenished with goodly Cedar trees, and having
discharged our arquebus-shot, such a flock of Cranes
(the most part white) arose under us, with such a cry
redoubled by many Echoes, as if an army of men had
shouted all together.

This Island had many goodly woods, and full of Deer,
Coneys, Hares, and Fowl, even in the midst of Summer,
in incredible abundance. The woods are not such as
you find in Bohemia, Moscovia, or Hyrcania, barren
and fruitless, but the highest and reddest cedars of
the world, far bettering the Cedars of the Azores, of
the Indias, or of Libanus ; Pines, Cypress, Sassafras, the
Lentisk, or the tree that beareth the Mastic ; the tree
that beareth the rind of black Cinnamon, of which
Master Winter brought from the Straits of Magellan ;
and many other of excellent smell and quality. We
remained by the side of this Island two whole days
96



RICHARD HAKLUYT



before we saw any people of the Country. The third
day we espied one small boat rowing towards us, having
in it three persons. This boat came to the land's side,
four arquebus-shot from our ships ; and there two
of the people remaining, the third came along the
shore side towards us, and we being then all within
board, he walked up and down upon the point of the
land next unto us. Then the Master and the Pilot
of the Admiral, Simon Ferdtnando, and the Captain,
Philip Amadas, myself, and others, rowed to the land ;
whose coming this fellow attended, never making any
show of fear or doubt. And after he had spoken of
many things not understood by us, we brought him,
with his own good liking, aboard the ships, and gave
him a shirt, a hat, and some other things, and made him
taste of our wine and our meat, which he liked very
well ; and, after having viewed both barks, he departed,
and went to his own boat again, which he had left in
a little Cove or Creek adjoining. As soon as he was two
bow-shot into the water he fell to fishing, and in less
than half an hour he had laden his boat as deep as
it could swim, with which he came again to the point
of the land, and there he divided his fish into two
parts, pointing one part to the ship and the other
to the pinnace. Which, after he had as much as he
might requited the former benefits received, departed
out of our sight.

The next day there came unto us divers boats, and
in one of them the King's brother, accompanied with
forty or fifty men, very handsome and goodly people,
and in their behaviour as mannerly and civil as any
of Europe. His name was Granganimeo, and the king
is called Wingina ; the country, Wingandacoa, (and
now by her Majesty V irginia). The manner of his

2830 e 97



RICHARD HAKLUYT



coming was in this sort : he left his boats altogether
as the first man did, a little from the ships by the
shore, and came along to the place over against the
ships, followed with forty men. When he came to
the place, his servants spread a long mat upon the
ground, on which he sat down, and at the other end
of the mat four others of his company did the like ;
the rest of his men stood round about him somewhat
afar off. When we came to the shore to him, with our
weapons, he never moved from his place, nor any of
the other four, nor never mistrusted any harm to
be offered from us ; but, sitting still, he beckoned
us to come and sit by him, which we performed ; and
being set, he makes all signs of joy and welcome,
striking on his head and his breast and afterwards
on ours, to show we were all one, smiling and making
show the best he could of all love and familiarity.
After he had made a long speech unto us we presented
him with divers things, which he received very joyfully
and thankfully. None of the company durst to speak
one word all the time ; only the four which were at
the other end spake one in the other's ear very softly.

Principall Navigations, Voiages, and Discoveries of
the English Nation

58 The "Death of Thomas Doughty
at Tort St. Julian

IN this port our General began to inquire diligently
of the actions of Master Thomas Doughty, and found
them not to be such as he looked for, but tending
rather to contention or mutiny, or some other disorder,
whereby (without redress) the success of the voyage
might greatly have been hazarded. Whereupon the
98



RICHARD HAKLUYT



company was called together and made acquainted
with the particulars of the cause, which were found
partly by Master Doughty's own confession, and partly
by the evidence of the fact, to be true. Which when
our General saw, although his private affection to
Master Doughty (as he then in the presence of us all
sacredly protested) was great, yet the care he had of
the state of the voyage, of the expectation of her
Majesty, and of the honour of his country did more
touch him (as indeed it ought) than the private re-
spect. of one man. So that the cause being throughly
heard, and all things done in good order as near as
might be to the course of our laws in England, it was
concluded that Master Doughty should receive punish-
ment according to the quality of the offence. And he,
seeing no remedy but patience for himself, desired
before his death to receive the Communion, which he
did at the hands of Master Fletcher, our Minister, and
our General himself accompanied him in that holy
action. Which being done, and the place of execution
made ready, he having embraced our General and
taken his leave of all the company, with prayer for
the Queen's majesty and our realm, in quiet sort laid
his head to the block, where he ended his life. This
being done, our General made divers speeches to the
whole company, perswading us to unity, obedience,
love, and regard of our voyage ; and for the better
confirmation thereof, willed every man the next Sunday
following to prepare himself to receive the Communion
as Christian brethren and friends ought to do. Which
was done in very reverent sort ; and so with good
contentment every man went about his business.

Prtnctpall Navigations, Votages, and Discoveries of
the English Nation

99



JOHN FLORIO

I553?-i6js

59 ^Montaigne, Of his Friend

IF a man urge mc to tell wherefore I loved him,
I feel it cannot be expressed, but by answering ;
Because it was he, because it was myself. There is
beyond all my discourse, and besides what I can
particularly report of it, I know not what inexplicable
and fatal power, a mean and Mediatrix of this indis-
soluble union. We sought one another before we
had seen one another, and by the reports we heard
one of another ; which wrought a greater violence in
us, than the reason of reports may well bear ; I think
by some secret ordinance of the heavens we embraced
one another by our names. And at our first meeting,
which was by chance at a great feast, and solemn
meeting of a whole township, we found ourselves so
surprised, so known, so acquainted, and so combmedly
bound together, that from thenceforward nothing
was so near unto us as one unto another. He writ an
excellent Latin Satire, since published, by which he
excuseth and expoundeth the precipitation of our
acquaintance, so suddenly come to her perfection ;
Sithence it must continue so short a time, and begun so
late (for we were both grown men, and he some years
older than myself) there was no time to be lost.
And it was not to be modelled or directed by the
pattern of regular and remiss friendship, wherein so
many precautions of a long and preallable conversation
are required. This hath no other Idea than of itself,
and can have no reference but to itself. It is not one
especial consideration, nor two, nor three, nor four,
nor a thousand : it is I wot not what kind of quint-

IOO



JOHN FLORIO



essence of all this commixture, which having seized
all my will, induced the same to plunge and lose
itself in his, which likewise having seized all his will,
brought it to lose and plunge itself in mine, with
a mutual greediness, and with a semblable concurrence.
I may truly say, lose, reserving nothing unto us that
might properly be called our own, nor that was either
his or mine. . .

In this noble commerce, offices and benefits (nurses
of other amities) deserve not so much as to be
accounted of ; this confusion so full of our wills is
cause of it ; for, even as the friendship I bear unto
myself admits no accrease by any succour I give
myself in any time of need, whatsoever the Stoicks
allege ; and as I acknowledge no thanks unto myself
for any service I do unto myself, so the union of such
friends, being truely perfect, makes them lose the
feeling of such duties, and hate, and expell from one
another these words of division, and difference,
benefit, good deed, duty, obligation, acknowledgment,
prayer, thanks, and such their like.

Montaigne's Essayes

60 Of Qruelty

AMONGST all other vices there is none I hate
_Z~\- more than cruelty, both by nature and judge-
ment, as the extremest of all vices. But it is with such
an yearning and faintheartedness, that if I see but
a chickens neck pulled off, or a pig sticked, I cannot
choose but grieve, and I cannot well endure a seely
dew-bedabbled hare to groan, when she is seized
upon by the hounds ; although hunting be a violent
sport. . .



IOI



JOHN FLORIO

The Cannibals and savage people do not so much
offend me with roasting and eating of dead bodies, as
those which torment and persecute the living. Let
any man be executed by law, how deservedly soever,
I cannot endure to behold the execution with an
unrelenting eye. . . Even in matters of justice, What-
soever is beyond a simple death, I deem it to be mere
cruelty ; And especially amongst us, who ought to
have a regardful respect, that their souls should be sent
to heaven, which cannot be, having first by intolerable
tortures agitated and as it were brought them to
despair. . .

I live in an age wherein we abound with incredible
examples of this vice, through the licentiousness of
our civil and intestine wars ; And read all ancient
Stories, be they never so tragical, you shall find none
to equal those, we daily see practised. But that hath
nothing made me acquainted with it. I could hardly
be perswaded, before I had seen it, that the world
could have afforded so marble-hearted and savage-
minded men, that for the only pleasure of murder
would commit it ; then cut, mangle, and hack other
members in pieces ; to rouse and sharpen their wits,
to invent unused tortures and unheard-of torments ;
to devise new and unknown deaths, and that in cold
blood, without any former enmity or quarrel, or
without any gain or profit ; and only to this end, that
they may enjoy the pleasing spectacle of the languishing
gestures, pitiful motions, horror-moving yellings,
deep-fetched groans, and lamentable voices of a dying
and drooping man. For, that is the extremest point
whereunto the cruelty of man may attain. Ut homo
hominem, non iratus, non timens, tantum spectaturus
occidat. That one man should kill another, neither being
102



JOHN FLORIO

angry, nor afeard, but only to look on. As for me, I could
never so much as endure, without remorse and grief,
to see a poor, silly, and innocent beast pursued and
killed, which is harmless and void of defence, and of
whom we receive no offence at all. And as it com-
monly happeneth, that when the Stag begins to be
embossed, and finds his strength to fail him, having
no other remedy left him, doth yield and bequeath
himself unto us that pursue him, with tears suing
to us for mercy,

questuque cruentus

A tque imploranti similis :

With blood from throat, and tears from eyes,

It seems that he for pity cries

was ever a grievous spectacle unto me.

Montaigne's Essayes

' b. r:

fi. 1581

61 Cleobis and Bito

THE most famous Solon, one of the City of Athens,
. . . undertake a pilgrimage into ^Egipt to King
Amaesis, and from thence to Sardis to the court of
Croesus, where in gentle and curteous manner beynge
entertayned by the Kinge at the thirde or fourth daye
after his arrivall he was lead about the treasuryes to
view the welth and riches of Croesus, beholdyng all
the inestimable and blessed jewels that were contayned
in them. After he had attentively beheld and with
curious eye surveyed them at his pleasure, Croesus
began to borde hym on this manner. You Gentleman

7 embossed) exhausted 26 borde) accost

j 03



* B. R.'



of Athens, for asmuch as we hearde greate good wordes
of your wysdome, beyng for knowledge and experience
sake a pilgrim from your countrey, wee have deemed it
convenient to aske you a question, whether at any time
you have seene the happiest man alive : not mis-
trusting, but that the lotte would have fallen to hym
selfe to have exceeded all others in blessednes. Solon
not mynding to double, as one altogeather unac-
quaynted with pleasing phrases, delivered his mynd in
free speech in forme as followeth.

I have seene O King (quoth he) Tellus, one of my
countriemen of Athens, a man surpassing all others
in happye lyfe ; wherat Croesus wondring, earnestlye
required what cause made him thinke so highlye of
Tellus.

For as muche (sayde he) as in a wel ordered common
wealth, hee hadde children, trayned up in unitye, and
honesty, every of which hadde likewyse increase of
his owne bodye, and yet all living. And having spent
the course of his age, as wel as a man might, Fortune
crowned his end with the perpetual renowne of a most
glorious death. For the Athenians joyning in battayle
with their next neighbours, Tellus comming with
a fresh supplye, and putting his ennemies to flight,
ended his life in the field, whom the people of Athens
in the selfe same place where he had shed his bloud,
caused to be entombed with immortall honour. Solon
going forward in a large discourse as touching Tellus
was cut of by Croesus with a second demaunde, who
asked him the second tyme, whom in conscience he
thoughte next unto him, in full hope, that at the least
his part had bene next : to whom he answeared in the
next degree.

Most mighty Prince, I have always reputed Cleobis
104



*B. R.'



and Biton, two younge menne of the Countrey of
Argos, of body so strong and active, that in alle games
they wonne the prize, of whom these thinges are left
to memorye.

The feast of Juno beynge kept at Argos, the mother
of those two young men was to bee drawne to the
temple by a yoke of bullocks, which when the howre
came beyng strayed and gone out of the way, the two
young youthes yoked themselves, and haling the
chariot forty fyve furlongs they came to the temple :
which after they had done in the sight and view of the
whole multitude in a lucky howre they dyed, wherby
the Goddesse gave us to understand how much better
it was for man to die then live. For where as the
people flocking abut extolled them to the heavens :
the men praising the good nature and intent of the
sonnes : the women commendinge the blessed chaunce
of the mother whom nature had indued with two such
children : the good old mother almost out of hyr
wyttes for joy, what for the kynd deede of her sonnes
and the goodly speech of the people, advauncinge
their virtue : as shee stoode before the ymage of
Juno, besought the Goddesse with earnest prayers to
rewarde the kindnes of hir children with the chiefe
and most precious blessing that might happen unto
man. Her prayer made, and both the sacrifyce and
feast ended, they gave themselves to rest in the
temple, but never after awaking, in the morning they
were founde dead, whom the people of Argos by two
carved monumentes placed at Delphos commended
to everlastinge memory for men of rare and excellent
vertue. To these men did Solon attribute the next
step to perfect happiness.

Translation of Herodotus
105



FULKE GREVILLE, LORD BROOKE



1554-1628

62 <>A Honeymoon

WHEN you married him, I know, for your part,
he was your first love ; and I judge the like of
him. . . Madam, in those neere conjunctions of
society, wherein death is the only honourable divorce,
there is but one end, which is mutual joy in procrea-
tion ; and to that end two assured ways : the one,
by cherishing affection with affection : the other, by
working affection, while she is yet in her pride, to
a reverence, which hath more power than itself. To
which are required advantage, or at least equality :
art, as well as nature. For contempt is else as neere as
respect ; the lovingest mind being not ever the most
lovely. Now though it be true that affections are
relatives, and love the surest adamant of love ; yet
must it not be measured by the untemperate ell of itself,
since prodigality yields fullness, satiety a desire of
change, and change repentance : but so tempered
even in trust, enjoying, and all other familiarities, that
the appetites of them we would please may still be
covetous, and their strengths rich. Because the decay
of either is a point of ill huswifery, and they that are
first bankrupt shut up their doors.

In this estate of minds, only governed by the un-
written laws of Nature, you did at the beginning live
happily together.

Letter sent to an honourable Lady



106



SIR PHILIP SIDNEY

1554-1586

63 Love in tArcady

SO it is, Mistress, said he, that yesterday driving
my sheep up to the stately hill, which lifts his
head over the fair City of Mantinea, I happened upon
the side of it, in a little falling of the ground which
was a rampier against the Sun's rage, to perceive
a young maid, truly of the finest stamp of beauty,
and that which made her beauty the more admirable,
there was at all no art added to the helping of it.
For her apparel was but such as Shepherds' daughters
are wont to wear : and as for her hair, it hung down
at the free liberty of his goodly length, but that
sbmetimes falling before the clear stars of her sight,
she was forced to put it behind her ears, and so open
again the treasure of her perfections, which that for
a while had in part hidden. In her lap there lay
a Shepherd, so wrapped up in that well-liked place,
that I could discern no piece of his face ; but as mine
eyes were attent in that, her Angel-like voice strake
mine ears with this song :

My true love hath my heart, and. I have his,
By just exchange, one for the other gtv'n.
I hold his dear, and mine he cannot miss :
There never was a better bargain driv'n.

His heart in me, keeps me and him in one,
My heart in him, his thoughts and senses guides :
He loves my heart, for once it was his own :
I cherish his, because in me it bides.

Arcadia



107



SIR PHILIP SIDNEY



64 With a Tale he cometh

NOW therein of all Sciences (I speak still of humane,
and according to the humane conceits) is our
Poet the Monarch. For he doth not only show the way,
but giveth so sweet a prospect into the way, as will
entice any man to enter into it. Nay, he doth, as if
your journey should lie through a fair Vineyard, at
the first give you a cluster of Grapes, that, full of that
taste, you may long to passe further. He beginneth not
with obscure definitions, which must blur the margent
with interpretations, and load the memory with
doubtfulness ; but he cometh to you with words set
in delightful proportion, either accompanied with, or
prepared for, the well enchanting skill of Musick ; and
with a tale forsooth he cometh unto you : with a tale
which holdeth children from play, and old men from
the chimney corner. And, pretending no more, doth
intend the winning of the mind from wickedness to
virtue : even as the child is often brought to take
most wholesome things by hiding them in such other
as have a pleasant taste : which, if one should begin
to tell them the nature of Aloes or Rhubarb they
should receive, would sooner take their Physick at
their ears than at their mouth. So is it in men (most
of which are childish in the best things, till they be
cradled in their graves) ; glad they will be to hear
the tales of Hercules, Achilles, Cyrus, and Aeneas;
and hearing them, must needs hear the right descrip-
tion of wisdom, valour, and justice ; which, if they
had been barely, that is to say, Philosophically set
out, they would swear they be brought to school again.

An Apologie for Poctru

108



SIR PHILIP SIDNEY



65 Qhevy Qhase

IS it the Lyrick that most displeaseth, who with his
tuned Lyre and well-accorded voice, giveth praise,
the reward of virtue, to virtuous acts ; who gives
moral precepts and natural Problems ; who sometimes
raiseth up his voice to the height of the heavens, m
singing the laudes of the immortal God ? Certainly,
I must confess my own barbarousness, I never heard
the old song of Percy and Duglas that I found not my
heart moved more than with a Trumpet ; and yet
is it sung but by some blind Crouder, with no rougher
voice than rude style ; which, being so evil apparelled
in the dust and cobwebs of that uncivil age, what
would it work trimmed in the gorgeous eloquence
of Pindar}

An Apologte for Poetrie

JOHN LYLY

? 1554-1606

66 Tko Sisters

THERE are also in this Island two famous Univer-
sities, the one Oxford, the other Cambridge, both
for the profession of all sciences, for Divinity, Physick,
Law, and all kind of learning, excelling all the Uni-
versities in Christendom.

I was myself in either of them, and like them both
so well that I mean not in the way of controversy
to prefer any for the better in England, but both for
the best in the world, saving this, that Colleges in
Oxenford are much more stately for the building, and
Cambridge much more sumptuous for the houses in

10 Crouder) fiddler

109



JOHN LYLY



the town ; but the learning neither lieth in the free
stones of the one, nor the fine streets of the other,
for out of them both do daily proceed men of great
wisdom to rule in the commonwealth, of learning to
instruct the common people, of all singular kind of
professions to do good to all. And let this suffice, not
to inquire which of them is the superior, but that
neither of them have their equal ; neither to ask
which of them is the most ancient, but whether any
other be so famous.

Euphues and Ms England

RICHARD HOOKER

1554-1600

67 Laws of Stature

NOW if nature should intermit her course, and
leave altogether though it were but for a while
the observation of her own laws ; if those principal
and mother elements of the world, whereof all things
in this lower world are made, should lose the qualities
which now they have ; if the frame of that heavenly
arch erected over our heads should loosen and dissolve
itself ; if celestial spheres should forget their wonted
motions, and by irregular volubility turn themselves
any way as it might happen ; if the prince of the lights
of heaven, which now as a giant doth run his unwearied
course, should as it were through a languishing faint-
ness begin to stand and to rest himself ; if the moon
should wander from her beaten way, the times and
seasons of the year blend themselves by disordered
and confused mixture, the winds breathe out their
last gasp, the clouds yield no rain, the earth be defeated
no



RICHARD HOOKER



of heavenly influence, the fruits of the earth pine away
as children at the withered breasts of their mother no
longer able to yield them relief : what would become
of man himself, whom these things now do all serve ?
See we not plainly that obedience of creatures unto
the law of nature is the stay of the whole world ?

The Laws of Ecclesiasltcall Poltlu



68 tZMan's ^Ascending Search

MAN doth seek a triple perfection : first a sensual,
consisting in those things which very life itself
requireth either as necessary supplements, or as
beauties and ornaments thereof ; then an intellectual,
consisting in those things which none underneath
man is either capable of or acquainted with ; lastly
a spiritual and divine, consisting in those things
whereunto we tend by supernatural means here, but
cannot here attain unto them. They that make the
first of these three the scope of their whole life, are
said by the Apostle to have no god but only their
belly, to be earthly minded men. Unto the second
they bend themselves, who seek especially to excel in
all such knowledge and virtue as doth most commend
men. To this branch belongeth the law of moral and
civil perfection. That there is somewhat higher than
either of these two, no other proof doth need than the
very process of man's desire, which being natural
should be frustrate, if there were not some farther
thing wherein it might rest at the length contented,
which in the former it cannot do. For man doth
not seem to rest satisfied, either with fruition of that
wherewith his life is preserved, or with performance

in



RICHARD HOOKER



of such actions as advance him most deservedly in
estimation ; but doth further covet, yea oftentimes
manifestly pursue with great sedulity and earnestness,
that which cannot stand him in any stead for vital
use ; that which exceedeth the reach of sense ; yea
somewhat above capacity of reason, somewhat divine
and heavenly, which with hidden exultation it rather
surmiseth than conceiveth ; somewhat it seekcth, and
what that is directly it knoweth not, yet very intentive
desire thereof doth so incite it, that all other known
delights and pleasures are laid aside, they give place to
the search of this but only suspected desire.

The Laws of Ecckstasticall Polilie



6g The Permanence of government

OF this point therefore we are to note, that sith
men naturally have no full and perfect power
to command whole politic multitudes of men, there-
fore utterly without our consent we could in such sort
be at no man's commandment living. And to be
commanded we do consent, when that society whereof
we are part hath at any time before consented, without
revoking the same after by the like universal agreement.
Wherefore as any man's deed past is good as long as
himself continueth ; so the act of a public society of
men done five hundred years sithence standeth as theirs
who presently are of the same societies, because
corporations are immortal ; we were then alive in
our Predecessors, and they in their Successors do
live still.

The Laws of Ecclesiasttcall Poltlte



1X2



THOMAS LODGE

155&-1625

70 aJtlindds Qomfort to Perplexed ^Rosalind

WHY, how now, Rosalind, dismayed with a
frown of contrary fortune? Have I not oft
heard thee say that high minds were discovered in
fortune's contempt, and heroical seen in the depth of
extremities ? . . . And more, mad lass, to be melancholy,
when thou hast with thee Alinda, a friend, who will
be a faithful co-partner of all thy misfortunes, who
hath left her father to follow thee, and chooseth rather
to brook all extremities than to forsake thy presence ?
What, Rosalind,

Solamen misens socios babuisse doloris P

Cheerly, woman ; as we have been bed-fellows in
royalty, we will be fellow-mates in poverty. I will
ever be thy Alinda, and thou shalt ever rest to me
Rosalind : so shall the world canonize our friendship,
and speak of Rosalind and Alinda, as they did of
Pylades and Orestes. And if ever fortune smile and
we return to our former honour, then folding ourselves
in the sweet of our friendship, we shall merrily say
(calling to mind our forepast miseries) —

Ohm haec meminisse juvabit.

At this Rosalind began to comfort her, and after
she had wept a few kind tears in the bosom of her
Alinda, she gave her hearty thanks, and then they sat
them down to consult how they should travel. Alinda
grieved at nothing but that they might have no man
in their company : saying, it would be their greatest
prejudice in that two women went wandering without
either guide or attendant. Tush, quoth Rosalind,

"3



THOMAS LODGE



art thou a woman, and hast not a sudden shift to
prevent a misfortune? I, thou seest, am of a tall
stature, and would very well become the person and
apparel of a page ; thou shalt be my mistress, and I
will play the man so properly that, trust me, in what
company soever I come I will not be discovered. I will
buy me a suit, and have my rapier very handsomely
at my side, and if any knave offer wrong, your page
will show him the point of his weapon. At this
Alinda smiled, and upon this they agreed, and presently
gathered up all their jewels, which they trussed up
in a casket, and Rosalind in all haste provided her of
robes . . . Alinda being called Aliena and Rosalind
Ganymede.

Rosalynde

THE BIBLE, AUTHORIZED VERSION,
i 6 i i

yi Jacob at the Ford

AND hee rose vp that night, and tooke his two
X\. wiues, and his two women seruants, and his
eleuen sonnes, and passed ouer the foord Iabbok.
And he tooke them, and sent them ouer the brooke,
and sent ouer that hee had.

And Iacob was left alone : and there wrestled
a man with him, vntill the breaking of the day. And
when he saw, that he preuailed not against him, he
touched the hollow of his thigh : and the hollow of
Iacobs thigh was out of ioynt, as hee wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me goe, for the day breaketh : and
he said, I will not let thee goe, except thou blesse me.
And he said vnto him, What is thy name? and he
114



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611



said, Iacob. And he said, Thy name shall be called
no more Iacob, but Israel : for as a prince hast thou
power with God, and with men, and hast preuailed.
And Iacob asked him, and saide, Tell me, I pray thee,
thy name : and he said, Wherefore is it, that thou
doest aske after my name ? and he blessed him there.

Genesis xxxn. 22-9

72 The Death of Absalom

AND Dauid sate betweene the two gates : and the
Jl\. watchman went vp to the roofe ouer the gate
vnto the wall, and lift vp his eyes, and looked, and
behold, a man running alone. And the watchman
cried, and told the King. And the king said, If he
bee alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came
apace, and drew neere. And the watchman saw
another man running, and the watchman called vnto
the porter, and said, Behold, another man running
alone. And the King said, He also bringeth tidings.
And the watchman said, Mee thinketh the running
of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the
sonne of Zadok. And the King said, Hee is a good
man, and commeth with good tidings. And Ahimaaz
called, and said vnto the King, All is well. And hee
fell downe to the earth vpon his face before the King,
and saide, Blessed bee the Lord thy God which hath
deliuered vp the men that lift vp their hande against
my lord the King. And the king said, Is the yong
man Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered, When
Ioab sent the kings seruant, and me thy seruant, I saw
a great tumult, but I knew not what it was. And the
king said vnto him, Turne aside and stand here. And
hee turned aside, and stood still. And behold, Cushi



"5



THE BIBLE



came, and Cushi said, Tidings my lord the Jcing : for
the Lord hath auenged thee this day of all them that
rose vp against thee. And the king said vnto Cushi,
Is the yong man Absalom safe ? And Cushi answered,
The enemies of my lord the king, and all that rise
against thee to doe thee hurt, be as that yong man is.

And the king was much moued, and went vp to
the chamber ouer the gate, and wept : and as he went,
thus hee said, O my sonne Absalom, my sonne, my
sonne Absalom : would God I had died for thee,
O Absalom, my sonne, my sonne.

2 Samuel xvm. 24-3'?



73 ' ^Remember now Thy Creator*

REMEMBER now thy Creatour in the dayes of
. thy youth, while the euil daies come not, nor the
yeeres drawe nigh, when thou shalt say, I haue no
pleasure in them : While the Sunne, or the light, or
the moone, or the starres be not darkened, nor the
cloudes returne after the raine : In the day when
the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bowe themselues, and the grinders cease,
because they are fewe, and those that looke out of the
windowes be darkened : And the doores shal be shut
in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low,
and he shall rise vp at the voice of the bird, and all
the daughters of musicke shall be brought low. Also
when they shalbe afraid of that which is high, and
feares shall bee in the way, and the Almond tree shall
flourish, and the grashopper shall be a burden, and
desire shall faile : because man goeth to his long home,
and the mourners goe about the streets : Or euer the
116



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611



siluer corde be loosed, or the golden bowle be broken,
or the pitcher be broken at the fountaine, or the wheele
broken at the cisterne. Then shall the dust returne
to the earth as it was : and the spirit shall returne
vnto God who gaue it.

Ecclesiasies xn 1-7

74 The Song of Solomon

i

THE voice of my beloued ! behold ! hee commeth
leaping vpon the mountaines, skipping vpon the

hils.

My beloued is like a Roc, or a yong Hart : behold,
he standeth behind our wall, he looketh foorth at the
windowe, shewing himselfe through the lattesse.

My beloued spake, and said vnto me, Rise vp, my
Loue, my faire one, and come away.

For loe, the winter is past, the rainc is ouer, and gone.

The flowers appeare on the earth, the time of the
singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle
is heard in our land.

The fig tree putteth foorth her greene figs, and the
vines with the tender grape giue a good smell. Arise,
my loue, my faire one, and come away.

O my doue ! that art in the clefts of the rocke, in
the secret places of the staires : let me see thy coun-
tenance, let me heare thy voice, for sweet is thy voice,
and thy countenance is comely.

Take vs the foxes, the litle foxes, that spoile the
vines : for our vines haue tender grapes.

My beloued is mine, and I am his : he feedeth
among the lillies.

"7



THE BIBLE



Vntill the day breake, and the shadowes flee away :
turne my beloued and be thou like a Roe, or a yong
Hart, vpon the mountaines of Bather.

Song of Solomon u. 8-17

it

BY night on my bed I sought him whome my soule
loueth. I sought him, but I found him not.
I will rise now, and goe about the citie in the streets,
and in the broad wayes I will seeke him whom my soule
loueth : I sought him, but I found him not.

The watchmen that goe about the citie, found me :
to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soule loueth ?

It was but a litle that I passed from them, but I
found him whome my soule loueth : I helde him,
and would not let him goe, vntill I had brought him
into my mothers house, and into the chamber of her
that concerned me.

I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalcm, by the
Roes and by the Hindes of the field, that ye stirre not
vp, nor awake my loue, till he please.

Song of Solomon 111. 1-5

iii

SET mee as a seale vpon thine heart, as a scale vpon
thine arme : for louc is strong as death, iealousie
is cruel as the graue : the coales thereof are coales
of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.

Many waters cannot quench loue, neither can the
floods drowne it : if a man would giue all the substance
of his house for loue, it would vtterly be contemned.

Song of Solomon vui. 6. 7

118



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611



75 Dirge for the King of 'Babylon

HELL from beneath is mooued for thee to meet
thee at thy comming : it stirreth vp the dead
for thee, euen all the chiefe ones of the earth ; it hath
raised vp from their thrones, all the kings of the
nations. All they shall speake and say vnto thee ;
Art thou also become weake as we f art thou become
like vnto us f Thy pompe is brought downe to the
graue, and the noyse of thy violes : the worme is
spread vnder thee, and the wormes couer thee. How
art thou fallen from heauen, O Lucifer, sonne of the
morning? how art thou cut downe to the ground,
which didst weaken the nations f

Isatah xiv. 9-12

76 * Thine eyes shall see the Kjng in his

beauty '

THINE eyes shall see the king in his beauty : they
shall behold the land that is very farre off. Thine
heart shall meditate terrour ; Where ts the scribe ?
where ts the receiuer f where is he that counted the
towres ? Thou shalt not see a fierce people, a people
of a deeper speech then thou canst perceiue ; of a
stammering tongue, that thou canst not vnderstand.
Looke vpon Zion, the city of our solemnities : thine
eyes shall see Ierusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle
that shall not be taken downe, not one of the stakes
thereof shall euer be remoued, neither shall any of
the coardes thereof be broken. But there the glorious
Lord will be vnto us a place of broad riuers and
streames ; wherein shall goe no galley with oares,
neither shall gallant ship passe thereby. For the Lord

119



THE BIBLE



is our Iudge, the Lord is our Lawgiuer, the Lord is
our King, he wil saue vs. Thy tacklings are loosed :
they could not well strengthen their mast, they could
not spread the saile : then is the praye of a great
spoile diuided, the lame take the praye. And the
inhabitant shall not say ; I am sicke : the people that
dwel therein shalbe forgiuen their iniquitie.

Isaiah xxxm. 17-24

77 The Wilderness

THE wildernesse and the solitarie place shall be
glad for them : and the desert shall reioyce and
blossome as the rose. It shall blossome abundantly,
and reioyce euen with ioy and singing : the glory of
Lebanon shal be giuen vnto it, the excellencie of
Carmel and Sharon : they shall see the glory of the
Lord, and the excellencie of our God.

Strengthen yee the weake hands, and confirme the
feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearefull
heart ; Be strong, feare not : behold, your God will
come with vengeance, euen God with a rccompence,
he will come and saue you. Then the eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the eares of the deafe shalbe
vnstopped. Then shall the lame man leape as an
Hart, and the tongue of the dumbe sing : for in the
wildernesse shall waters breake out, and streames in
the desert. And the parched ground shall become
a poole, and the thirstie land springs of water : in
the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shalbe grasse
with reeds and rushes. And an high way shalbe there,
and a way, and it shall be called the way of holinesse,
the vncleane shall not passe ouer it, but it shall be
for those : the wayfaringmen, though f ooles, shall not
120



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611

erre therein. No lyon shalbe there ; nor any rauen-
ous beast shall goe vp thereon, it shall not be found
there : but the redeemed shall walke there. And the
ransomed of the Lord shall returne and come to Zion
with songs, and euerlasting ioy vpon their heads : they
shall obtaine ioy and gladnesse, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.

Isatah xxxv. i-io

78 Surge, illuminare !

ARISE, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory
£\_ of the Lord is risen vpon thee. For behold,
the darkncsse shall couer the earth, and grosse darknesse
the people : but the Lord shall arise vpon thee, and
his glory shall be seene vpon thee. And the Gentiles
shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightnesse
of thy rising. The Sunne shall be no more thy light
by day, neither for brightnesse shall the moone giue
light vnto thee : but the Lord shall be unto thee an
euerlasting light, and thy God thy glory. Thy Sunne
shall no more goe downe, neither shall thy moone
withdraw it selfe : for the Lord shall bee thine euer-
lasting light, and the dayes of thy mourning shall be
ended.

Isaiah Ix 1-3, 19-20

79 The Vision of Dry 'Bones

THE hand of the Lord was vpon mee, and caried
mee out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set mee
downe in the middest of the valley which was full of
bones, And caused mee to passe by them round about,
and beholde, there were very many in the open valley,
and loe, they were very drie. And hee said vnto mee,

121



THE BIBLE

Sonne of man, can these bones liue f and I answered,
O Lord God, thou knowest. Againe he said vnto me,
Prophecie vpon these bones, and say vnto them ;

yee drie bones, heare the word of the Lord. Thus
saith the Lord God vnto these bones, Behold, I wil
cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall liue.
And I wil lay sinewes vpon you, and wil bring vp flesh
vpon you, and couer you with skinne, and put breath
in you, and ye shall liue, and ye shall know that I am
the Lord. So I prophecied as I was commanded :
and as I prophecied, there was a noise, and beholde
a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to
his bone. And when I beheld, loe, the sinews and the
flesh came vp vpon them, and the skin couered them
aboue ; but there was no breath in them. Then said
he vnto mee, Prophecie vnto the winde, prophecie
sonne of man, and say to the winde, Thus saith the
Lord God ; Come from the foure windes, O breath,
and breathe vpon these slaine, that they may liue.
So I prophecied as he commanded mee, and the breath
came into them, and they liued, and stood vp vpon
their feet, an exceeding great armie.

Then he said vnto me, Sonne of man, these bones
are the whole house of Israel : behold, they say ;
Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost, wee are
cut off for our parts. Therefore prophecie and say
vnto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, O my
people, I wil open your graues, and cause you to come
vp out of your graues, and bring you into the land of
Israel. And ye shall know that I am the Lord, when

1 haue opened your graues, O my people, and brought
you vp out of your graues.

EzeMel xxxvii. 1-13



122



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611



80 ' (jod's purpose is eternal! '

AND he said vnto me, in the beginning when the
earth was made, before the borders of the world
stood, or euer the windes blew, Before it thundred
and lightned, or euer the foundations of Paradise
were laide, Before the faire flowers were seene, or
euer the moueable powers were established, before the
innumerable multitude of Angels were gathered to-
gether, Or euer the heights of the aire were lifted vp,
before the measures of the firmament were named,
or euer the chimnies in Sion were hot, And ere the
present yeeres were sought out, and or euer the in-
uentions of them that now sinne were turned, before
they were sealed that haue gathered faith for a treasure :
Then did I consider these things, and they all were
made through mee alone, and through none other :
by mee also they shall be ended, & by none other.

2 Esdras vi. 1-6

' Let us now praise Jamous men, and our

81 jathers that begat us '

1ET vs now praise famous men, and our Fathers
j that begat vs. The Lorde hath wrought great
glory by them, through his great power from the
beginning. Such as did beare rule in their kingdomes,
men renowmed for their power, giuing counsell by
their vnderstanding, and declaring prophecies : Leaders
of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge
of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent
in their instructions. Such as found out musical tunes,
and recited verses in writing. Rich men furnished
with abilitie, liuing peaceably in their habitations.

"3



THE BIBLE



All these were honoured in their generations, and were
the glory of their times. There be of them, that haue
left a name behind them, that their praises might be
reported. And some there be, which haue no memorial,
who are perished as though they had neuer bene, and
are become as though they had neuer bene borne,
and their children after them. But these were merci-
full men, whose righteousnesse hath not beene for-
gotten. With their seed shall continually remaine
a good inheritance, and their children are within the
couenant. Their seed stands fast, and their children
for their sakes. Their seed shall remaine for euer,
and their glory shall not be blotted out. Their bodies
are buried in peace, but their name liueth for euermore.

Ecclesiastlms xliv. 1-14

82 The Walk to Smmaus

AND behold, two of them went that same day to
jLjL a village called Emaus, which was from Hieru-
salem about threescore furlongs. And they talked
together of all these things which had happened.
And it came to passe, that while they communed
together, and reasoned, Iesus himselfe drew neere,
and went with them. But their eyes were holden,
that they should not know him. And he said vnto
them, What manner of communications are these that
yee haue one to another as yee walke, and are sad ?
And the one of them, whose name was Cleophas,
answering, saide vnto him, Art thou onely a stranger
in Hierusalem, and hast not knowen the things which
are come to passe there in these dayes ? And hee saide
vnto them, What things 1 And they said vnto him,
Concerning Iesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet,
124



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611

mighty in deede and word before God, and all the
people. And how the chiefe Priests and our rulers
deliuered him to be condemned to death, and haue
crucified him. But wee trusted that it had bene hee,
which should have redeemed Israel : and beside all
this, to day is the third day since these things were
done. Yea, and certaine women also of our company
made vs astonished, which were early at the Sepulchre :
And when they found not his bodie, they came,
saying, that they had also seene a vision of Angels,
which saide that he was aliue. And certaine of them
which were with vs, went to the Sepulchre, and found
it euen so as the women had said, but him they saw
not. Then hee saide vnto them, O fooles, and slow
of heart to beleeue all that the Prophets haue spoken :
Ought not Christ to haue suffered these things, and
to enter into his glorie ? And beginning at Moses, and
all the Prophets, hee expounded vnto them in all the
Scriptures, the things concerning himselfe. And they
drew nigh vnto the village, whither they went, and hee
made as though hee would haue gone further. But
they constrained him, saying, Abide with vs, for it is
towards euening, and the day is farre spent : And he
went in, to tarrie with them. And it came to passe,
as hee sate at meate with them, hee tooke bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gaue to them. And their
eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished
out of their sight. And they said one vnto another,
Did not our heart burne within vs, while hee talked
with vs by the way, and while hee opened to vs the
Scriptures ? And they rose vp the same houre, and
returned to Hierusalem,and found the eleuen gathered
together, and them that were with them, Saying,
The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.

125



THE BIBLE



And they told what things were done in the way,
& how he was knowen of them in breaking of bread.

St. Luke xxiv. 13-35

83 ' Charity '

THOUGH I speake with the tongues of men &
of Angels, and haue not charity, I am become
as sounding brasse or a tinkling cymbal. And though
I haue the gift of prophesie, and vnderstand all
mysteries and all knowledge : and though I haue all
faith, so that I could remooue mountaines, and haue
no charitie, I am nothing. And though I bestowe all
my goods to feede the poore, and though I giue my
body to bee burned, and haue not charitie, it profiteth
me nothing. Charitie suffereth long, and is kinde :
charitie enuieth not : charitie vaunteth not it selfe,
is not puffed vp, Doeth not behaue it selfe vnseemly,
seeketh not her owne, is not easily prouoked, thinketh
no euill, Reioyceth not in iniquitie, but reioyceth
in the trueth : Beareth all things, beleeueth all things,
hopeth all things, endureth all things. Charitie neuer
faileth : but whether there be prophesies, they shall
faile ; whether there bee tongues, they shall cease ;
whether there bee knowledge, it shall vanish away.
For we know in part, and we prophesie in part. But
when that which is perfect is come, then that which
is in part, shalbe done away. When I was a childe,
I spake as a childe, I vnderstood as a childe, I thought
as a childe : but when I became a man, I put away
childish things. For now we see through a glasse,
darkely : but then face to face : now I know in part,
but then shall I know euen as also I am knowen. And
now abideth faith, hope, charitie, these three, but the
greatest of these is charitie.

1 Corinthians xm. 1-13

126



AUTHORIZED VERSION, 1611



84 ' 'Behold, I show you a mystery '

BEHOLD, I shew you a mysterie : we shall not
all sleepe, but wee shall all be changed, In a
moment, in the twinckling of an eye, at the last
trumpe, (for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.)
For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortall must put on immortalitie. So when this
corruptible shall haue put on incorruption, & this
mortall shall haue put on immortality, then shall be
brought to passe the saying that is written, Death is
swallowed vp in victorie. O death, where is thy sting ?
O graue, where is thy victorie ? The sting of death is
sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law. But thankes
bee to God, which giueth us the victorie, through our
Lord Iesus Christ. Therefore my beloued brethren, be
yee stedfast, vnmoveable, alwayes abounding in the
worke of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
labour is not in vaine in the Lord.

1 Corinthians xv. 51-8



RICHARD CAREW

1555-1620

85 The ^Praise of English

THE Italian is pleasant but without sinews, as too
stilly fleeting water ; the French delicate but over
nice, as a woman scarce daring to open her lips for fear
of marring her countenance ; the Spanish majestical,
but fulsome, running too much on the o, and terrible
like the devil in a play ; the Dutch manlike, but withal
very harsh, as one ready at every word to pick a

127



RICHARD CAREW



quarrel. Now we in borrowing from them give the
strength of consonants to the Italian, the full sound of
words to the French, the variety of terminations to
the Spanish, and the mollifying of more vowels to the
Dutch ; and so, like bees, gather the honey of their
good properties and leave the dregs to themselves.
And thus, when substantialness combineth with de-
lightfulness, fullness with fineness, seemliness with
portliness, and courrantness with staidness, how can the
language which consisteth of all these sound other than
most full of sweetness ?

Again, the long words that we borrow, being inter-
mingled with the short of our own store, make up a
perfect harmony, by culling from out which mixture
(with judgement) you may frame your speech according
to the matter you must work on, majcstical, pleasant,
delicate, or manly, more or less, in what sort you
please. Add hereunto, that whatsoever grace any other
language carrieth, in verse or prose, in tropes or
metaphors, in echoes or agnominations, they may all
be lively and exactly represented in ours. Will you
have Plato's vein ? read Sir Thomas Smith : the
Ionic] Sir Thomas More: Cicero's f Ascham :
V arro i Chaucer : Demosthenes ] Sir John Chckc (who
in his Treatise to the Rebels hath comprised all the
figures of rhetoric). Will you read Virgil] take the
Earl of Surrey : Catullus ? Shakespeare, and Mar-
lowe's fragment : Ovid] Daniel: Lucan] Spenser:
Martial] Sir John Davis and others. Will you have
all in all for prose and verse ] take the miracle of our
age, Sir Philip Sidney.

An Epistle on the Excellency of the
English Tongue



128



JAMES MELVILLE

1556-1614

86 The ^Armada Castaways in Fife

TERRIBLE was the fear, piercing were the preach-
ings, earnest, zealous, and fervent were the
prayers, sounding were the sighs and sobs, and abound-
ing were the tears at that Fast and General Assembly
keipet at Edinburgh, when the news was credibly
tauld, sometimes of their landing at Dunbar, sometimes
at St. Andrews, and in lay, and now and then at
Aberdeen and Cromarty Firth. And in very deed,
as we knew certainly soon after, the keeper of his awin
Israel, was in the meantime convoying that monstrous
navy about our coasts, and directing their hulks and
galiates to the islands, rocks, and sands, whereupon he
had destined their wreck and destruction. For within
twa or three month thereafter, early in the morning,
by break of day, ane of our bailyies cam to my bedside,
saying (but not with fear), ' I have to tell you news,
Sir. There is arrived within our harbour this morning
a ship full of Spaniards, but not to give mercy but to
ask ! ' And shows me that the Commanders had
landit, and he had commandit them to their ship
again till the Magistrates of the town had advised, and
the Spaniards had humbly obeyit : therefore desired
me to rise and hear their petition with them. Up
I got with diligence, and assembling the honest men
of the town, cam to the Tolbuthe ; and after consulta-
tion taken to hear them and what answer to make,
there presents us a very reverend man of big stature,
and grave and stout countenance, grey-haired, and
very humble like, wha, after mickle and very low
courtesy, bowing down with his face near the ground,

2830 F 129



JAMES MELVILLE

and touching my shoe with his hand, began his
harangue in the Spanish tongue, whereof I understood
the substance ; and being about to answer in Latin,
he, having only a young man with him to be his
interpreter, began and tauld over again to us in good
English. The sum was, that King Philip, his master,
had rigged out a navy and army to land in England,
for just causes to be avengit of many intolerable
wrongs quhilk he had receivit of that nation ; but God
for their sins had been against them, and by storm of
weather had driven the navy by the coast of England,
and him with a certain of Captains, being the General
of twenty hulks, upon an isle of Scotland, called the
Fair Isle, where they made shipwreck, and where
sae many as had escapit the merciless seas and rocks,
had mair nor sax or seven weeks suffered great hunger
and cauld, till conducing that bark out of Orkney,
they were come hither as to their special friends and
confederates to kiss the King's Majestie's hands of
Scotland (and therewith bekkit even to the earth), and
to find relief and comfort thereby to himself, these
gentlemen Captains, and the poor soldiers, whose con-
dition was for the present most miserable and pitiful.

I answered this mickle, in sum : That howbeit
neither our friendship, quhilk could not be great,
seeing their King and they were friends to the greatest
enemy of Christ, the Pope of Rome, and our King
and we defied him, nor yet their cause against our
neighbours and special friends of England could
procure any benefit at our hands, for their relief and
comfort ; nevertheless, they should know by experience
that we were men, and sa moved by human compassion,
and Christians of better religion nor they, quhilk

20 bekhti) bowed
130



JAMES MELVILLE

should kythe, in the fruits and effect, plain contrary to
ours. For whereas our people resorting among them
in peaceable and lawful affairs of merchandise, were
violently taken and cast in prison, their guids and gear
confiscate, and their bodies committed to the cruel
flaming fire for the cause of Religion, they should find
na things among us but Christian pity and works
of mercy and alms. . . . But verily all the while my heart
melted within me for desire of thankfulness to God,
when I rememberit the prideful and cruel natural of
they people, and how they would have used us in case
they had landit with their forces among us ; and saw
the wonderful work of God's mercy and justice in
making us see them, the chief commanders of them
to make sic dewgard and courtesy to poor seamen, and
their soldiers so abjectly to beg alms at our doors and
in our streets.

Diary

SIR WALTER RALEGH

1552 ?-i6i8

87 The Last Fight of the TZguenge

A LL the powder of the Revenge to the last barrel was
JLx. now spent, all her pikes broken, forty of her best
men slain, and the most part of the rest hurt. In the
beginning of the fight she had but one hundred free
from sickness, and fourscore and ten sick, laid in hold
upon the ballast. A small troop to man such a ship,
and a weak garrison to resist so mighty an army. By
those hundred all was sustained, the volleys, boardings,
and enterings of fifteen ships of war, besides those
which beat her at large. On the contrary, the Spanish

1 kythe) appear 15 dewgard) dteu-garde (salutation)

131



SIR WALTER RALEGH



were always supplied with soldiers brought from every
squadron : all manner of arms and powder at will.
Unto ours there remained no comfort at all, no hope,
no supply either of ships, men, or weapons ; the masts
all beaten overboard, all her tackle cut asunder, her
upper work altogether rased, and in effect evened she
was with the water, but the very foundation or bottom
of a ship, nothing being left overhead either for flight
or defence. Sir Richard finding himself in this distress,
and unable any longer to make resistance, having
endured in this fifteen hours' fight the assault of
fifteen several Armadoes, all by turns aboard him,
and by estimation eight hundred shot of great artillery,
besides many assaults and entries ; and that himself
and the ship must needs be possessed by the enemy,
who were now all cast in a ring round about him ; the
Revenge not able to move one way or other, but as she
was moved with the waves and billow of the sea :
commanded the master Gunner, whom he knew to
be a most resolute man, to split and sink the ship ;
that thereby nothing might remain of glory or victory
to the Spaniards, seeing in so many hours' fight, and
with so great a Navy they were not able to take her,
having had fifteen hours' time, fifteen thousand men,
and fifty and three sail of men-of-war to perform it
withal : and perswaded the company, or as many as
he could induce, to yield themselves unto God, and
to the mercy of none else ; but as they had like valiant
resolute men repulsed so many enemies, they should
not now shorten the honour of their nation, by pro-
longing their own lives for a few hours, or a few days.
The master Gunner readily condescended, and divers
others ; but the Captain and the Master were of
another opinion, and besought Sir Richard to have care

122



SIR WALTER RALEGH



of them : alleging that the Spaniard would be as ready
to entertain a composition as they were willing to
offer the same : and that there being divers sufficient
and valiant men yet living, and whose wounds were
not mortal, they might do their country and prince
acceptable service hereafter. And (that where Sir
Richard had alleged that the Spaniards should never
glory to have taken one ship of Her Majesty's seeing
that they had so long and so notably defended them-
selves) they answered, that the ship had six foot water
in hold, three shot under water, which were so weakly
stopped as with the first working of the sea she must
needs sink, and was besides so crushed and bruised as
she could never be removed out of the place.

And as the matter was thus in dispute, and Sir
Richard refusing to hearken to any of those reasons,
the master of the Revenge (while the Captain wan
unto him the greater party) was convoyed aboard the
General, Don Alfonso Bassan. Who finding none over
hasty to enter the Revenge again, doubting lest Sir
Richard would have blown them up and himself, and
perceiving by the report of the master of the Revenge
his dangerous disposition : yielded that all their lives
should be saved, the company sent for England, and
the better sort to pay such reasonable ransom as their
estate would bear, and in the mean season to be free
from galley or imprisonment. To this he so much
the rather condescended as well, as I have said, for
fear of further loss and mischief to themselves, as also
for the desire he had to recover Sir Richard Grenville ;
whom for his notable valour he seemed greatly to
honour and admire.

A Report of the Truth of the Fight about the Isle of Azores betwixt
the Revenge and an Armada of the King of Spam

133



SIR WALTER RALEGH



88 Death

FOR the rest, if we seek a reason of the succession
and continuance of this boundless ambition in
mortal men, we may add to that which hath been
already said ; That the Kings and Princes of the world
have always laid before them the actions, but not the
ends, of those great Ones which preceded them. They
are always transported with the glory of the one, but
they never mind the misery of the other till they find
the experience in themselves. They neglect the advice
of God while they enjoy life, or hope it ; but they
follow the counsel of Death upon his first approach.
It is he that puts into man all the wisdom of the world
without speaking a word ; which God with all the
words of his Law promises, or threats, doth not infuse.
Death, which hateth and destroyeth man, is believed ;
God, which hath made him and loves him, is always
deferred. / have considered (saith Solomon) all the
works that are under the Sun, and behold, all is vanity
and vexation of spirit : but who believes it till Death
tells it us ? It was Death which, opening the con-
science of Charles the fifth, made him enjoin his son
Philip to restore Navarre ; and King Francis the first
of France to command that justice should be done
upon the Murderers of the Protestants in Merindol
and Cahrieres, which till then he neglected. It is
therefore Death alone that can suddenly make man
to know himself. He tells the proud and insolent that
they are but Abjects, and humbles them at the
instant ; makes them cry, complain, and repent, yea,
even to hate their forepassed happiness. He takes the
account of the rich and proves him a beggar ; a naked
beggar which hath interest in nothing but in the gravel
134



SIR WALTER RALEGH



that fills his mouth. He holds a Glass before the eyes
of the most beautiful, and makes them see therein their
deformity and rottenness ; and they acknowledge it.

O eloquent, just, and mighty Death ! whom none
could advise, thou hast perswaded ; what none hath
dared thou hast done ; and whom all the world hath
flattered, thou only hast cast out of the world and
despised : thou hast drawn together all the far-
stretched greatness, all the pride, cruelty, and ambition
of man, and covered it all over with these two narrow
words, Hie jacet.

A History of the World

8g Letter to his Wife on the Death
of his Son

I WAS loth to write, because I know not how to
comfort you ; And God knows I never knew what
sorrow meant till now. All that I can say to you is,
that you must obey the will and providence of God,
and remember that the Queen's Majesty bare the loss
of the Prince Henry with a magnanimous heart, and
the Lady Harrington of her only son. Comfort your
heart (Deare Bess) ; I shall sorrow for us both : and
I shall sorrow the less because I have not long to sor-
row, because I have not long to live. I refer you to
Mr. Secretary Winwood's Letter, who will give you
a copy of it if you send for it. Therein you shall know
what hath passed, what I have written by that Letter,
for my brains are broken, and 'tis a torment to me
to write, especially of misery. I have desired Mr.
Secretary to give my Lord Carew a copy of his letter.
I have cleansed my ship of sick men, and sent them

*3S



SIR WALTER RALEGH



home ; and hope that God will send us somewhat ere
we return. Commend me to all at Lothbury. You
shall hear from me if I live, from new Found Land,
where I mean to Clean my ship and revictual, for
I have Tobacco enough to pay for it. The Lord bless
you and Comfort you, that you may bear patiently
the death of your most valiant son.

Your Wal. Raleigh.
March the 22th from the Isle of St. Christophers.



FRANCIS BACON, VISCOUNT
ST. ALBANS

1561-1626

go The Service of the tMuses

IET thy master, Squire, offer his service to the Muses.
j It is long since they received any into their court.
They give alms continually at their gate, that many
come to live upon ; but few have they ever admitted
into their palace. There shall he find secrets not
dangerous to know, sides and parties not factious
to hold, precepts and commandments not penal to
disobey. The gardens of love wherein he now playeth
himself are fresh to-day and fading to-morrow, as the
sun comforts them or is turned from them. But the
gardens of the Muses keep the privilege of the golden
age ; they ever flourish and are in league with time.
The monuments of wit survive the monuments of
power : the verses of a poet endure without a syllable
lost, while states and empiies pass many periods. Let
him not think he shall descend, for he is now upon
a hill as a ship is mounted upon the ridge of a wave ;
but that hill of the Muses is above tempests, always
136



FRANCIS BACON



clear and calm ; a hill of the goodliest discovery that
man can have, being a prospect upon all the errors
and wanderings of the present and former times. Yea,
in some cliff it leadeth the eye beyond the horizon of
time, and giveth no obscure divinations of times to come.
So that if he will indeed lead vitam vitalem, a life that
unites safety and dignity, pleasure and merit ; if he will
win admiration without envy ; if he will be in the feast
and not in the throng, in the light and not in the heat ;
let him embrace the life of study and contemplation.

Essex's Device

91 Of First and Second Causes

IF any man shall think by view and inquiry into
these sensible and material things to attain that
light, whereby he may reveal unto himself the nature
or will of God, then indeed is he spoiled by vain
philosophy : for the contemplation of God's creatures
and works produceth (having regard to the works and
creatures themselves) knowledge, but having regard to
God, no perfect knowledge, but wonder, which is
broken knowledge. And therefore it was most aptly
said by one of Plato's school, That the sense of man
carrieth a resemblance with the Sun, which (as we see)
openeth and revealeth all the terrestrial Globe ; but then
again it obscure th and c once ale th the stars and celestial
Globe: So doth the sense discover natural things, but it
darkeneth and shutteth vp divine. And hence it is true
that it hath proceeded, that divers great learned men
have been heretical, whilst they have sought to fly
up to the secrets of the Deity by the waxen wings of
the senses. And as for the conceit that too much
knowledge should incline a man to atheism, and that

137



FRANCIS BACON

the ignorance of second causes should make a more
devout dependence upon God, which is the first
cause ; First, it is good to ask the question which Job
asked of his friends : Will you he for God, as one man
will do for another, to gratify him ? For certain it
is that God worketh nothing in nature but by second
causes : and if they would have it otherwise believed,
it is mere imposture, as it were in favour towards God ;
and nothing else but to offer to the Author of truth the
unclean sacrifice of a lie. But further, it is an assured
truth, and a conclusion of experience, that a little
or superficial knowledge of Philosophy may incline
the mind of Man to Atheism, but a further proceeding
therein doth bring the mind back again to Religion.
For in the entrance of Philosophy, when the second
causes, which are next unto the senses, do offer them-
selves to the mind of Man, if it dwell and stay there it
may induce some oblivion of the highest cause ; but
when a man passeth on further, and seeth the depen-
dence of causes, and the works of Providence, then,
according to the allegory of the Poets, he will easily
believe that the highest link of nature's chain must
needs be tied to the foot of Jupiter's chair. To
conclude therefore, let no man upon a weak conceit of
sobriety or an ill-applied moderation think or maintain,
that a man can search too far, or be too well studied in
the book of God's word, or in the book of God's
works, Divinity or Philosophy ; but rather let men
endeavour an endless progress or proficience in both ;
only let men beware that they apply both to Charity,
and not to swelling ; to use, and not to ostentation ;
and again, that they do not unwisely mingle or
confound these learnings together.

The Advancement of Learning

138



VISCOUNT ST. ALBANS



92 Of Death. I

MEN fear Death as children fear to go in the dark ;
and as that natural fear in children is increased
with tales, so is the other. Certainly, the contempla-
tion of Death, as the wages of sin and passage to another
world, is holy and religious ; but the fear of it, as
a tribute due unto Nature, is weak. . . It is as natural
to die as to be born ; and to a little infant perhaps the
one is as painful as the other. He that dies in an
earnest pursuit is like one that is wounded in hot blood,
who, for the time, scarce feels the hurt ; and therefore
a mind fixed and bent upon somewhat that is good
doth avert the dolours of Death ; but, above all,
believe it, the sweetest canticle is Nunc dimittis, when
a man hath obtained worthy ends and expectations.
Death hath this also, that it openeth the gate to good
fame, and extinguisheth envy : Extinctus amabitur
idem.

Essays

93 Of Death. II

WHY should man be in love with his fetters,
though of gold ? Art thou drowned in security ?
Then I say thou art perfectly dead. For though thou
movest, yet thy soul is buried within thee, and thy
good angel either forsakes his guard or sleeps. There
is nothing under heaven, saving a true friend (who
cannot be counted within the number of movables),
unto which my heart doth lean. And this dear
freedom hath begotten me this peace, that I mourn
not for that end which must be, nor spend one wish
to have one minute added to the incertain date of



139



FRANCIS BACON



my years. It was no mean apprehension of Lucian,
who says of Menippus, that in his travels through
hell, he knew not the Kings of the earth from other
men, but only by their louder cryings and tears : which
were fostered in them through the remorseful memory
of the good days they had seen, and the fruitful
havings which they so unwillingly left behind them :
he that was well seated, looked back at his portion,
and was loth to forsake his farm ; and others either
minding marriages, pleasures, profit, or preferment,
desired to be excused from Death's banquet : they
had made an appointment with earth, looking at the
blessings, not the hand that enlarged them, forgetting
how unclothedly they came hither, or with what
naked ornaments they were arrayed.

Essay on Death

94 Of Delays

FORTUNE is like the market, where many times,
if you can stay a little, the price will fall ; and again,
it is sometimes like Sibylla's offer, which at first
offereth the commodity at full, then consumeth part
and part, and still holdeth up the price ; for Occasion
(as it is in the common verse) turneth a bald noddle after
she hath presented her locks in front, and no hold taken ;
or, at least, turneth the handle of the bottle first to
be received, and after the belly, which is hard to clasp.
There is surely no greater wisdom than well to time
the beginnings and onsets of things. . . And generally
it is good to commit the beginnings of all great actions
to Argus with his hundred eyes, and the ends to
Briareus with his hundred hands ; first to watch and
then to speed ; for the helmet of Pluto, which maketh
140



VISCOUNT ST. ALBANS

the politic man go invisible, is secrecy in the counsel,
and celerity in the execution ; for when things are
once come to the execution, there is no secrecy com-
parable to celerity ; like the motion of a bullet in
the air, which flieth so swift as it outruns the eye.

Essays

95 Of Studies

READ not to contradict and confute, nor to
believe and take for granted, nor to find talk
and discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some Books
are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few
to be chewed and digested ; That is, some Books are
to be read only in parts ; others to be read but not
curiously, and some few to be read wholly, and with
diligence and attention. Some Books also may be
read by deputy, and extracts made of them by others ;
but that would be only in the less important arguments
and the meaner sort of Books ; else distilled books are
like common distilled waters, flashy things. Reading
maketh a full man ; Conference a ready man ; and
Writing an exact man ; and therefore, if a man write
little he had need have a great memory ; if he confer
little he had need have a present wit ; and if he
read little he had need have much cunning, to seem to
know that he doth not. Histories make men wise ;
Poets, witty ; the Mathematuks, subtile ; Natural
Philosophy, deep ; Moral, grave ; Logick and, Rhetorick,
able to contend : Abeunt studta in mores.

Essays



141



FRANCIS BACON



96 Of Qardens

A ND because the breath of Flowers is far sweeter in
Ji\. the air (where it comes and goes like the warbling
of Musick) than in the hand, therefore nothing is more
fit for that delight than to know what be the flowers
and plants that do best perfume the air. Roses,
damask and red, are fast flowers of their smells ; so
that you may walk by a whole row of them, and find
nothing of their sweetness ; yea, though it be in
a morning's dew. Bays likewise yield no smell as they
grow, Rosemary little, nor Sweet Marjoram ; that
which above all others yields the sweetest smell in the
air is the Violet, especially the White double Violet,
which comes twice a year, about the middle of April
and about Bartholomew-tide. Next to that is the
Muskrose ; then the Strawberry-leaves dying, with
a most excellent cordial smell ; then the Flower of the
Vines, it is a little dust like the dust of a Bent, which
grows upon the cluster in the first coming forth ; then
Sweet-Briar, then Wallflowers, which are very delight-
ful to be set under a parlour or lower chamber window ;
then Pinks and Gilliflowers, especially the matted pink,
and Clove Gilliflower ; then the flowers of the Lime-
tree ; then the Honeysuckles, so they be somewhat afar
off. Of Bean-Flowers I speak not, because they are
field-Flowers ; but those which perfume the air most
delightfully, not passed by as the rest, but being
trodden upon and crushed, are three ; that is, Burnet,
Wild Thyme, and Water Mints ; therefore you are to
set whole alleys of them, to have the pleasure when you
walk or tread.

Essays



142



SIR HENRY MONTAGU, EARL OF
MANCHESTER

1563 ?-i642

97 The Soul's Excellency

IET me ever worship the great God of this little
j god, my soule, Et ne plus ultra. For this is an
inquisition, fitter for Angelical intelligence than man's
shallow capacity.

Only this I know, that to no creature else God hath
given a reasonable soul : of creatures, the lowest rank
have no life, the next no essence, the third no reason ;
none but man hath grace ; nor is there hope in any
creature else but man, which hope is given him for
the sustentation of his soul. Anima enim non est
instar Chamaeleontis, ut pascatur vento, it cannot be
fed with fancies, nor all the favours of the world. She
is ita generosa, as nothing but that summum bonum will
satisfy her. Saint Augustine, in a comparative betwixt
things temporal and eternal, saith thus, We love things
temporal before we have them, more than when we
have them, because the soul when she hath them
cannot be satisfied with them ; but things eternal,
when they are actually possessed, are more loved than
when but desired ; for neither faith could believe,
nor hope expect so much as charity shall find when
eternity comes in possession. There is no soul in
the world, how happy soever it thinks itself here,
but points its prehensions beyond what he possesses
here.

Manchester Al Mondo



143



WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

1564-1616

98 Fa/staff and the Hostess

CHIEF JUSTICE. How comes this, Sir John ?
Fie ! what man of good temper would endure this
tempest of exclamation? Are you not ashamed to
enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come
by her own ?

Falstaff. What is the gross sum that I owe thee f
Hostess. Marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself,
and the money too. Thou didst swear to me upon
a parcel-gilt Goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber,
at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, on Wednesday
in Whitson week, when the Prince broke thy head
for likening him to a singing-man of Windsor ;
Thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy
wound, to marry me, and make me my Lady thy wife.
Canst thou deny it ? Did not goodwife Keech the
Butcher's wife come in then and call me gossip
Quickly ? coming in to borrow a mess of Vinegar ;
telling us she had a good dish of Prawns ; whereby
thou didst desire to eat some, whereby I told thee they
were ill for a green wound? And didst not thou,
when she was gone down stairs, desire me to be no
more familiar with such poor people ; saying that ere
long they should call me Madam ? And didst thou
not kiss me and bid me fetch thee thirty shillings ?
I put thee now to thy Book-oath : deny it if thou
canst.

Falstaff. My Lord, this is a poor mad soul ; and she
says up and down the town that her eldest son is like
you. She hath been in good case, and the truth is,
poverty hath distracted her. But for these foolish
Officers, I beseech you I may have redress against them.
144



W1I.L1A1V1 OriAlS.liSfliAKli



Chief Justice. Sir John, Sir John, I am well
acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true
cause the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the
throng of words that come with such (more than impu-
dent) sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level con-
sideration ; I know you ha' practised upon the easy-
yielding spirit of this woman.

Hostess. Yes, in troth, my Lord.

Chief Justice. Prithee, peace. Pay her the debt you
owe her, and unpay the villany you have done her :
the one you may do with sterling money, and the other
with current repentance.

Falstaff My Lord, I will not undergo this sneap
without reply. You call honourable Boldness impudent
Sauciness : If a man will curtsy, and say nothing,
he is virtuous. No, my Lord, my humble duty
remember'd, I will not be your suitor. I say to you,
I desire deliverance from these Officers, being upon
hasty employment in the King's Affairs.

Chief Justice. You speak as having power to do
wrong : But answer in the effect of your Reputation,
and satisfy the poor woman.

Falstaff. Come hither, Hostess, {takes her aside).
Enter M. Gower

Chief Justice. Now, Master Gower ! what news ?

Gower. The King, my Lord, and Henry Prince of
Wales

Are near at hand : The rest the Paper tells.
Falstaff. As I am a Gentleman.
Hostess. Nay, you said so before.
Falstaff. As I am a Gentleman. Come, no more
words of it.

Hostess. By this Heavenly ground I tread on, I must
be fain to pawn both my Plate and the Tapestry of
my dining chambers.

145



WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



Falstaff. Glasses, glasses, is the only drinking : and
for thy walls, a pretty slight Drollery, or the Story of
the Prodigal, or the German hunting in Water-work,
is worth a thousand of these Bed-hangings and these
Fly-bitten Tapestries. Let it be ten pound, if thou
canst. Come, if it were not for thy humours, there
is not a better Wench in England. Go, wash thy face,
and draw thy Action. Come, thou must not be in
this humour with me. Come, I know thou wast set
on to this.

Hostess. Prithee, Sir John, let it be but twenty
Nobles : I loathe to pawn my Plate, in good earnest la !

Falstaff. Let it alone ; I'll make other shift : you'll
be a fool still.

Hostess. Well, you shall have it, although I pawn my
Gown. I hope you'll come to Supper. You'll pay
me all together ?

Falstaff. Will I live?

2 Henry IV, II. i

99 Justice Shallow on Death

OH ALLOW. Come on, come on, come on ; give me
J your Hand, Sir, give me your hand, Sir : an early
stirrer, by the Rood ! And how doth my good Cousin
Silence ?

Silence. Good morrow, good Cousin Shallow.

Shallow. And how doth my Cousin, your Bedfellow ?
and your fairest Daughter and mine, my God-daughter
Ellenl

Silence. Alas ! a black Ousel, Cousin Shallow !

Shallow. By yea and nay, Sir, I dare say my Cousin
William is become a good Scholar? He is at Oxford
still, is he not?

8 draw) withdraw
146



WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



Silence. Indeed, Sir, to my cost.

Shallow. He must, then, to the Inns of Court shortly.
I was once of Clement's Inn ; where, I think, they will
talk of mad Shallow yet.

Silence. You were called ' lusty Shallow ' then, Cousin.

Shallow. I was called any thing ; and I would have
done any thing indeed too, and roundly too. There
was I, and little John Doit of Staffordshire, and black
George Bare, and Francis Pickbone, and W ill Squele a
Cotswold man ; you had not four such swinge- bucklers
in all the Inns of Court again : And, I may say to
you, we knew where the Bona-Robas were, and had
the best of them all at commandment. Then was
Jack Falstaff (now Sir John) a Boy, and Page to
Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.

Silence. This Sir John, Cousin, that comes hither
anon about Soldiers ?

Shallow. The same Sir John, the very same. I saw
him break Scoggan's Head at the Court Gate, when he
was a crack not thus high : and the very same day
did I fight with one Sampson Stockfish, a Fruiterer,
behind Gray's Inn. Oh, the mad days that I have
spent ! and to see how many of mine old Acquaintance
are dead !

Silence. We shall all follow, Cousin.

Shallow. Certain, 'tis certain ; very sure, very sure :
Death is certain to all ; all shall die. How a good
Yoke of Bullocks at Stamford Fair?

Silence. Truly, Cousin, I was not there.

Shallow. Death is certain. Is old Double of your
town living yet ?

Silence. Dead, Sir.

Shallow. Dead? See, see : he drew a good Bow ; and
dead ? he shot a fine shoot : John of Gaunt loved him

147



WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



well, and betted much money on his head. Dead ?
he would have clapped in the Clout at Twelve-score,
and carried you a forehand Shaft at fourteen, and
fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man's
heart good to see. How a score of Ewes now ?

Silence. Thereafter as they be : a score of good Ewes
may be worth ten pounds.

Shallow. And is old Double dead ?

2 Henry IV, III. li

ioo 'Before lAgincourt

ING HENRT. For, though I speak it to you, I
think the King is but a man, as I am : the Violet
smells to him as it doth to me ; the Element shows to
him as it doth to me ; all his Senses have but human
Conditions : his Ceremonies laid by, in his Nakedness
he appears but a man ; and though his affections
are higher mounted than ours, yet when they stoop,
they stoop with the like wing. Therefore when he
sees reason of fears, as we do, his fears, out of doubt,
be of the same relish as ours are : yet, in reason, no
man should possess him with any appearance of fear,
lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his Army. . .
Methinks I could not die any where so contented as
in the King's company, his Cause being just and his
Quarrel honourable. . .

Williams. But if the Cause be not good, the King
himself hath a heavy Reckoning to make ; when all
those Legs and Arms and Heads, chopped off in a
Battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry
all, 4 We died at such a place ; ' some swearing, some
crying for a Surgeon, some upon their Wives left poor
behind them, some upon the Debts they owe, some
upon their Children rawly left. I am afeard there
148




WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



are few die well that die in a Battle ; for how can they
charitably dispose of any thing when Blood is their
argument f Now, if these men do not die well, it will
be a black matter for the King that led them to it,
whom to disobey were against all proportion of
subjection.

King Henry. So, if a Son that is by his Father sent
about Merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the Sea,
the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be
imposed upon his Father that sent him : or if a Servant
under his Master's command transporting a sum of
Money, be assailed by Robbers and die in many
irreconciled Iniquities, you may call the business of
the Master the author of the Servant's damnation.
But this is not so : The King is not bound to answer
the particular endings of his Soldiers, the Father of
his Son, nor the Master of his Servant ; for they
purpose not their death when they purpose their
services. Besides, there is no King, be his Cause never
so spotless, if it come to the arbitrement of Swords,
can try it out with all unspotted Soldieis. Some,
peradventure, have on them the guilt of premeditated
and contrived Murder ; some, of beguiling Virgins
with the broken Seals of Perjury ; some, making the
Wars their Bulwark, that have before gored the gentle
Bosom of Peace with Pillage and Robbery. Now, if
these men have defeated the Law and outrun Native
punishment, though they can outstrip men, they have
no wings to fly from God : War is his Beadle, War is
his Vengeance ; so that here men are punished for
before-breach of the King's Laws in now the King's
Quarrel : where they feared the death they have borne
life away, and where they would be safe they perish.
Then, if they die unprovided, no more is the King

149



WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE



guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of
those Impieties for the which they are now visited.
Every Subject's Duty is the King's ; but every
Subject's Soul is his own. Therefore should every
Soldier in the Wars do as every sick man in his Bed,
wash every Mote out of his Conscience ; and dying so,
Death is to him advantage ; or not dying, the time
was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained :
and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think, that
making God so free an offer, he let him outlive that
day to see his Greatness, and to teach others how they
should prepare.

Henry V, IV. 1

ioi Hamlet

I HAVE of late, — but wherefore I know not, —
lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercise ;
and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition
that this goodly frame, the Earth, seems to me a
sterile Promontory ; this most excellent Canopy, the
Air, look you, this brave o'erhanging Firmament, this
Majestical Roof fretted with golden fire, why, it
appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent
congregation of vapours. What a piece of work is
a man ! How Noble in Reason ! how infinite in
faculty ! in form and moving, how express and ad-
mirable ! in Action how like an Angel ! in apprehen-
sion how like a God ! the beauty of the world ! the
Paragon of Animals ! And yet, to me, what is this
Quintessence of Dust ? Man delights not me ; no,
nor Woman neither, though, by your smiling, you
seem to say so.

Hamlet, H. u



THOMAS NASH



1567-1601

102 <±A Dedication

To The Most Honored, And Vertuous Beautified
Ladie, The Ladie Elizabeth Carey : Wife to the
thrice magnanimous, and noble discended Knight,
Sir George Carey, Knight Marshall, &c.

EXCELLENT accomplish^ Court-glorifying Lady,
give mee leaue, with the sportiue Sea Porposes,
preludiatelie a little to play before the storme of my
Teares : to make my prayer ere I proceede to my
sacrifice.

Diuine Ladie, you I must and will memorize more
especially, for you recompence learning extraordin-
arilie. Pardon my presumption, lend patience to
my prolixitie, and if any thing in all please, thinke it
was complied to please you. This I auouche, no line
of it was layde downe without awfull looking backe
to your frowne. To write in Diuinitie I would not
have aduentured, if ought els might haue consorted
with the regenerate grauitec of your iudgement.
Your thoughts are all holy, holy is your life ; in your
hart Hues no delight but of Heauen. Farre be it
I should proffer to vnhallow them with any prophane
papers of mine. The care I haue to worke your
holy content, I hope God hath ordained, to call me
home sooner vnto him.

Varro saith, the Philosophers held two hundred
and eyght opinions of f elicitie : two hundred and eyght
felicities to me shall it bee, if I haue framed any one
line to your lyking. Most resplendent Ladie, encourage
mee, fauour mee, countenaunce mee in this, and

151



THOMAS NASH



something ere long I will aspire to, beyond the
common mediocritie.

Your admired Ladiships most deuoted,

Tho. Nashe.

Chrisls Teares over Jerusalem

103 iA c Roman 'Banqueting House

TO tell you of the rare pleasures of theyr gardens,
theyr bathes, theyr vincyardes, theyr galleries,
were to write a seconde part of the gorgeous Gallerie
of gallant deuices. Why, you should not come into
anie mannes house of account, but hee hadde fish-
pondes and little orchardes on the toppe of his leads.
If by raine or any other meanes those ponds were so
full they need to be slust or let out, euen of their
superfluities they made melodious vse, for they had
great winde instruments in stead of leaden spoutes,
that went duly in consort, onely with this waters
rumbling discent. I sawe a summer banketting house
belonging to a merchaunt, that was the meruaile of
the world, & could not be matcht except God should
make another paradise. It was builte round of greene
marble like a Theater with-out : within there was
a heauen and earth comprehended both vndcr one
roofe ; the heauen was a clcere ouerhanging vault of
christall, wherein the Sunne and Moone and each
visible Starre had his true similitude, shine, scituation,
and motion, and, by what enwrapped arte I cannot
conceiue, these spheares in their proper orbes obserued
their circular wheelinges and turnings, making a cer-
taine kind of soft angelical murmering musicke in their
often windings and going about ; which musick the

12 slust) slutced

152



THOMAS NASH



philosophers say in the true heauen, by reason of the
grosenes of our senses, we are not capable of. For the
earth, it was conterfeited in that liknes that Adam
lorded out it before his fall. A wide vast spacious
roome it was, such as we would conceit prince Arthurs
hall to be, where he feasted all his knights of the
round table together euerie penticost. The flore was
painted with the beautifullest flouers that euer mans
eie admired ; which so linealy were delineated that
he that viewd them a farre off, and had not directly
stood poaringly ouer them, would haue sworne they
had liued in deede. The wals round about were
hedgde with oliues and palme trees, and all other
odoriferous fruit-bearing plants ; which at anie
solemne intertainment dropt mirrhe and frankensence.

O Rome, if thou hast in thee such soul-exalting
obiects, what a thing is heauen in comparison of thee,
of which Mercators globe is a perfecter modell than
thou art ? The Ltfe of Jacke Wilton

WILLIAM ADLINGTON

publ. 1566

104 Qupid and ^Psyche

WHEN Psyche was left alone (saving that she
seemed not to be alone, being stirred by so
many furies) she was in a tossing mind like the waves
of the sea, and although her will was obstinate, and
resisted to put in execution the counsel of her Sisters,
yet she was in doubtful and divers opinions touching
her calamity. Sometimes she would, sometimes she
would not, sometime she is bold, sometime she feares,
sometime she mistrusteth, sometime she is moved,

'S3



WILLIAM ADLINGTON



sometime she hateth the beast, sometime she loveth
her husband : but at length night came, when as she
prepared for her wicked intent.

Soon after her husband came, and when he had
kissed and embraced her he fell asleep. Then Psyche
(somewhat feeble in body and mind, yet moved by
cruelty of fate) received boldness and brought forth
the lamp, and took the razor, and so by her audacity
she changed her kind : but when she took the lamp
and came to the bedside, she saw the most meek and
sweetest beast of all beasts, even fair Cupid couched
fairly, at whose sight the very lamp increased his
light for joy, and the razor turned his edge.

But when Psyche saw so glorious a body she greatly
feared, and amazed in mind, with a pale countenance
all trembling fell on her knees and thought to hide the
razor, yea, verily in her own heart, which doubtless
she had undoubtedly done, had it not (through fear
of so great an enterprise) fallen out of her hand. And
when she saw and beheld the beauty of this divine
visage she was well recreated in her mind, she saw his
hairs of gold, that yielded out a sweet savour, his neck
more white than milk, his purple cheeks, his hair
hanging comely behind and before, the brightness
whereof darkened the light of the lamp, his tender
plume feathers, dispersed upon his shoulders like
shining flowers, and trembling hither and thither, and
his other parts of his body so smooth and so soft, that
it repented not Venus to bear such a child. At the
beds feet lay his bow, quiver, and arrows, that be the
weapons of so great a god : which when Psyche did
curiously behold, she marvelled at the weapons of her

I hateth the beast) her sisters have told Psyche that her invisible
husband is a serpent.

154



WILLIAM ADLINGTON



husband, took one of the arrows out of the quiver, and
pricked herself withall, wherewith she was so grievously
wounded that the blood followed, and thereby of her
own accord she added love upon love ; then more
and more broiling in the love of Cupid she embraced
and kissed him a thousand times, fearing the measure
of his sleep. But, alas, while she was in this great joy,
where it were for envy, or for desire to touch this
amiable body likewise, there fell out a drop of burning
oil from the lamp upon the right shoulder of the god.
O rash and bold lamp, the vile ministery of love, how
darest thou be so bold as to burn the god of all fire ?
When as he invented thee, to the intent that all lovers
might with more joy pass the nights in pleasure.

The god being burned in this sort, and perceiving
that promise was broken, fled away without utterance
of any word, from the eyes and hands of his most
unhappy wife. The Golden Ass

GERVASE MARKHAM

c. 1 568-1 637

105 1 ^Matched in mouth like bells'

IF you would have your Kennel for sweetness of
cry, then you must compound it of some large
dogs, that have deep solemn mouths, and are swift
in spending, which must as it were bear the base in
the consort ; then a double number of roaring, and
loud ringing mouths, which must bear the counter
tenor ; then some hollow plain sweet mouths, which
must bear the mean or middle part : and so with
these three parts of musick, you shall make your cry
perfect. . .
8 where) whether 22 spending) giving cry

«S5



GERVASE MARKHAM



If you would have your Kennel for loudness of
mouth, you shall not then choose the hollow deep
mouth, but the loud clanging mouth, which spendeth
freely and sharply, and as it were redoubleth in the
utterance : and if you mix with them the mouth that
roareth, and the mouth that whineth, the cry will be
both the louder and smarter ; . . . and the more equally
you compound these mouths, having as many roarers
as spenders, and as many whiners as of either of the
other, the louder and pleasanter your cry will be,
especially if it be in sounding tall woods, or under the
echo of Rocks.

Country Contentments



SIR HENRY WOTTON

1568-1639

106 To £Mr. John ^Milton

IT was a special favour when you lately bestowed
upon me here the first taste of your acquaintance,
though no longer than to make me know that I
wanted more time to value it and to enjoy it rightly ;
and in truth, if I could then have imagined your farther
stay in these parts, which I understood afterward by
Mr. H., I would have been bold, in our vulgar phrase,
to mend my draught (for you left me with an extreme
thirst), and to have begged your conversation again
jointly with your said learned friend at a poor meal or
two, that we might have banded together some good
authors of the ancient time : among which I observed
you to have been familiar.

Since your going you have charged me with new
obligations, both for a very kind letter from you, dated
'56



SIR HENRY WOTTON



the sixth of this month, and for a dainty piece of enter-
tainment that came therewith. Wherein I should
much commend the tragical part if the lyrical did not
ravish me with a certain Dorique delicacy in your songs
and odes ; whereunto I must plainly confess to have
seen yet nothing parallel in our language, Ipsa mollifies.
But I must not omit to tell you that I now only owe
you thanks for intimating unto me (how modestly
soever) the true artificer. For the work itself I had
viewed some good while before with singular delight,
having received it from our common friend Mr. R.
in the very close of the late R.'s Poems printed at
Oxford ; whereunto is added (as I now suppose) that
the accessory might help out the principal, according
to the art of Stationers, and to leave the Reader Con
la bocca dolce.

Now, Sir, concerning your travels, wherein I may
challenge a little more privilege of discourse with you.
I suppose you will not blanch Paris in your way ;
therefore I have been bold to trouble you with a few
lines to Master M. B., whom you shall easily find
attending the young Lord S. as his governor, and you
may surely receive from him good directions for the
shaping of your farther journey into Italy, where he
did reside by my choice some time for the King, after
mine own recess from Venice.

I should think that your best line will be through
the whole length of France to Marseilles, and thence
by sea to Genoa, whence the passage into Tuscany is
as diurnal as a Gravesend barge. I hasten, as you do
to Florence, or Siena the rather, to tell you a short story
from the interest you have given me in your safety.

At Siena I was tabled in the house of one Alberto

I a dainty piece) i. e. ' Comus '

*57



SIR HENRY WOTTON

Scipioni, an old Roman courtier in dangerous times,
having been steward to the Duca di Pagliano, who with
all his family were strangled, save this only man that
escaped by foresight of the tempest. With him I had
often much chat of those affairs, into which he took
pleasure to look back from his native harbour, and at
my departure toward Rome (which had been the centre
of his experience) I had won confidence enough to
beg his advice how I might carry myself securely
there, without offence of others or of mine own
conscience. ' Stgnor Arrigo mio ' (says he), ' i pensieri
stretti e il visa sciolto : (That is, Tour thoughts close,
and your countenance loose,) will go safely over the whole
world.' Of which Delphian oracle (for so I have found
it) your judgement doth need no commentary ; and
therefore, (Sir,) I will commit you with it to the best
of all securities, God's dear love, remaining,
Tour friend as much at command as any of longer date,

H. WOTTON.
Letter concerning ' Comus ' and advice to Milton,
13 April 1638

BEN JONSON

1573 ?-i637

107 The Dignity of Speech

C*PEECH is the only benefit man hath to express his
excellency of mind above other creatures. It is
the Instrument of Society. Therefore Mercury, who is
the President of Language, is called Deorum hominumque
interpres. In all speech, words and sense are as the
body and the soul. The sense is as the life and soul
of Language, without which all words are dead. Sense
is wrought out of experience, the knowledge of human
life and actions, or of the liberal Arts, which the
158



BEN JONSON



Greeks called 'EyKUKAowaiStiW. Words are the
Peoples ; yet there is a choice of them to be made.
For Verbor-um delectus, ortgo est eloquentiae. They
are to be chose according to the persons we make
speak, or the things we speak of. Some are of the
Camp, some of the Council-board, some of the Shop,
some of the Sheep-cote, some of the Pulpit, some of
the Bar, &c. And herein is seen their Elegance and
Propriety, when we use them fitly, and draw them forth
to their just strength and nature, by way of Transla-
tion or Metaphor. But in this Translation we must only
serve necessity (Nam temere nihil transferor a prudenti)
or commodity, which is a kind of necessity ; that is,
when we either absolutely want a word to express by,
and that is necessity ; or when we have not so fit
a word, and that is commodity. As when we avoid
loss by it, and escape obsceneness, and gain in the grace
and property, which helps significance. Metaphors far
fet hinder to be understood, and affected, lose their
grace. Or when the person fetcheth his translations
from a wrong place. As if a Privy Counsellor should
at the Table take his Metaphor from a Dicing-house,
or Ordinary, or a Vintners Vault ; or a Justice of
Peace draw his similitudes from the Mathematicks ; or
a Divine from a Bawdy-house or Taverns ; or a
Gentleman of Northamptonshire, W arwickshire, or the
Midland, should fetch all his Illustrations to his
country neighbours from shipping, and tell them of
the main sheet, and the Boulin. Metaphors are thus
many times deformed, as in him that said, Castratam
morte Aphricani Rempublicam. And another, stercus
curiae Glauciam. And Cana nive conspuit Alpes. All
attempts that are new in this kind are dangerous, and
iq fet) fetched

iS9



BEN JONSON

somewhat hard before they be softened with U6e.
A man coins not a new word without some peril, and
less fruit ; for if it happen to be received, the praise
is but moderate ; if refused, the scorn is assured. Yet
we must adventure, for things at first, hard and rough,
are by use made tender and gentle. It is an honest
error that is committed, following great Chiefs.

Custom is the most certain Mistress of Language,
as the publicke stamp makes the current money. But
we must not be too frequent with the mint, every
day coining. Nor fetch words from the extreme and
utmost ages ; since the chief virtue of a style is per-
spicuity, and nothing so vicious in it, as to need an
Interpreter. Words borrowed of Antiquity do lend
a kind of Majesty to style, and are not without their
delight sometimes. For they have the Authority of
years, and out of their intermission do win to them-
selves a kind of grace-like newness. But the eldest of
the present, and newness of the past Language, is
the best. For what was the ancient Language, which
some men so dote upon, but the ancient Custom?
Yet when I name Custom, I understand not the vulgar
Custom : For that were a precept no less dangerous
to Language, than life, if we should speak or live
after the manners of the vulgar : But that I call
Custom of speech, which is the consent of the Learned ;
as Custom of life, which is the consent of the good.
Virgil was most loving of Antiquity ; yet how rarely
doth he insert aquai and pictai ! Lucretius is scabrous
and rough in these ; he seeks 'hem : As some do
Chaucerisms with us, which were better expung'd
and banished. Some words are to be culled out for
ornament and colour, as we gather flowers to straw
houses, or make Garlands ; but they are better when
160



BEN JONSON

they grow to our style ; as in a Meadow, where though
the mere grass and greenness delights ; yet the variety
of flowers doth heighten and beautify. Marry, we
must not play, or riot too much with them, as in
Paranomasies : Nor use too swelling or ill-sounding
words ; Quae -per salebras, altaqve saxa cadunt. It is
true, there is no sound but shall find some Lovers,
as the bitterest confections are grateful to some
palats. Our composition must be more accurate in
the beginning and end than in the midst ; and in the
end more than in the beginning ; for through the
midst the stream bears us. And this is attained by
Custom more than care or diligence. We must
express readily, and fully, not profusely. There is
difference between a liberal and a prodigal hand.
As it is a great point of Art, when our matter requires
it, to enlarge, and veer out all sail ; so to take it in
and contract it is of no less praise when the Argument
doth ask it. Either of them hath their fitness in the
place. A good man always profits by his endeavour,
by his help ; yea, when he is absent ; nay, when he
is dead by his example and memory. So good Authors
in their style : A strict and succinct style is that,
where you can take away nothing without loss, and that
loss to be manifest.

Discoveries

108 His Poverty

AT last they upbraided my poverty ; I confess
JlSl. she is my Domestick ; sober of diet, simple of
habit ; frugal, painful ; a good Counsellor to me ;
that keeps me from Cruelty, Pride, or other more
delicate impertinences ; which are the Nurse-children
4830 g 161



BEN JONSON

of Riches. But let them look over all the great and
monstrous wickednesses, they shall never find those in
poor families. They are the issue of the wealthy
Giants, and the mighty Hunters : Whereas no great
work, or worthy of praise, or memory, but came out
of poor cradles. It was the ancient poverty that
founded Commonweals, built Cities, invented Arts,
made wholesome Laws ; armed men against vices ;
rewarded them with their own virtues ; and preserved
the honour, and state of Nations, till they betrayed
themselves to Riches.

Discoveries

iog Eloquence

ELOQUENCE is a great and diverse thing : Nor
did she yet ever favour any man so much as to
become wholly his. He is happy that can arrive to
any degree of her grace. Yet there are, who prove
themselves Masters of her, and absolute Lords : but
I believe they may mistake their evidence : For it
is one thing to be eloquent in the Schools, or in the
Hall ; another at the Bar, or in the Pulpit. There is
a difference between Mooting and Pleading ; between
Fencing and Fighting. To make Arguments in my
Study and confute them is easy ; where I answer my-
self, not an Adversary. So I can see whole volumes
dispatched by the umbratical Doctors on all sides :
But draw these forth into the just lists ; let them
appear sub dio, and they are changed with the place,
like bodies bred i' the shade ; they cannot suffer the
Sun, or a Shower ; nor bear the open Air : they scarce
can find themselves, that they were wont to domineer
so among their Auditors : but indeed I would no
162



BEN JONSON



more choose a Rhetorician for reigning in a School
than I would a Pilot for rowing in a Pond.

Discoveries

no Of our Fellow Qountryman
Shakespeare

J REMEMBER, the Players have often mentioned
it as an honour to Shakespeare, that in his writing
(whatsoever he penned) he never blotted out line.
My answer hath been, would he had blotted a thousand.
Which they thought a malevolent speech. I had not
told posterity this, but for their ignorance, who choose
that circumstance to commend their friend by,
wherein he most faulted ; And to justify mine own
candour (for I loved the man, and do honour his
memory (on this side Idolatry) as much as any). He
was (indeed) honest, and of an open and free nature :
had an excellent Phantsie ; brave notions, and gentle
expressions: wherein he flowed with that facility, that
sometime it was necessary he should be stopped :
Sufflaminandus erat ; as Augustus said of Haterius.
His wit was in his own power ; would the rule of it
had been so too. Many times he fell into those things,
could not escape laughter : As when he said in the
person of Caesar, one speaking to him ; Caesar thou
dost me wrong. He replied : Caesar did never wrong,
but with just cause : and such like ; which were ridicu-
lous. But he redeemed his vices with his virtues.
There was ever more in him to be praised than to be
pardoned.

Discoveries



163



BEN JONSON



in Of Francis 'Bacon

ONE, though he be excellent, and the chief, is
not to be imitated alone. For never no Imitator
ever grew up to his Author ; likeness is always on this
side Truth : Yet there happened, in my time, one
noble Speaker, who was full of gravity in his speaking.
His language (where he could spare, or pass by a jest)
was nobly censorious. No man ever spake more neatly,
more pressly, more weightily, or suffered less empti-
ness, less idleness, in what he uttered. No member
of his speech but consisted of the owne graces. His
hearers could not cough, or look aside from him,
without loss. He commanded where he spoke ; and
had his Judges angry and pleased at his devotion.
No man had their affections more in his power. The
fear of every man that heard him, was, lest he should
make an end.

Cicero is said to be the only wit that the people of
Rome had equalled to their Empire. Ingemum par
imperio. We have had many, and in their several Ages,
(to take in but the former Seculum.) Sir Thomas Moore,
the elder W tat ; Henry, Earl of Surrey ; Chaloner,
Smith, Eliot, B. Gardiner, were for their times admir-
able : and the more, because they began Eloquence
with us. Sir Nico: Bacon was singular, and almost
alone, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeths times.
Sir Philip Sidney and Mr. Hooker (in different matter)
grew great Masters of wit and language ; and in whom
all vigour of Invention and strength of judgement met.
The Earl of Essex, noble and high ; and Sir Walter
Rawleigh, not to be contemned either for judgement
or style. Sir Henry Savile grave and truly lettered ;
Sir Edwin Sandes excellent in both ; Lord Egerton,
164



BEN JONSON

the Chancellor, a grave and great Orator ; and best,
when he was provoked. But his learned and able
(though unfortunate) Successor is he who hath filled
up all numbers ; and performed that in our tongue,
which may be compared, or preferred, either to insolent
Greece or haughty Rome. In short, within his view,
and about his times, were all the wits born that could
honour a language or help study. Now things daily
fall : wits grow downward and Eloquence grows back-
ward : So that he may be named, and stand as the
mark, and of our language.

/ have ever observed it to have been the office of
a wise Patriot, among the greatest affairs of the State,
to take care of the Common-wealth of Learning. For
Schools, they are the Seminaries of State : and
nothing is worthier the study of a Statesman than that
part of the Republicke which we call the advancement
of Letters. Witness the care of Julius Caesar ; who,
in the heat of the civil war, wrote his books of Analogie,
and dedicated them to Tully. This made the late
Lord S. Alhane entitle his work, novum Organum.
Which though by the most of superficial men, who
cannot get beyond the Title of Nominals, it is not
penetrated, nor understood ; it really openeth all
defects of Learning whatsoever ; and is a Book

Qui longum noto scriptori porriget aevum.

My conceit of his Person was never increased toward
him by his place or honours. But I have and do
reverence him for the greatness that was only proper
to himself, in that he seemed to me ever, by his work,
one of the greatest men, and most worthy of admira-
tion, that had been in many Ages. In his adversity
I ever prayed that God would give him strength :

165



BEN JONSON

for Greatness he could not want. Neither could I
condole in a word or syllable for him ; as knowing
no Accident could do harm to virtue ; but rather
help to make it manifest.

Discoveries

112 Of 'Public Schools

A YOUTH should not be made to hate study before
. he know the causes to love it : or taste the bitter-
ness before the sweet ; but called on, and allured,
entreated, and praised : Yea, when he deserves it
not. For which cause I wish them sent to the best
school, and a publike, which I think the best. Your
Lordship I fear hardly hears of that, as willing to
breed them in your eye, and at home ; and doubting
their manners may be corrupted abroad. They are
in more danger in your own Family, among ill servants
(allowing, they be safe in their School-Master), than
amongst a thousand boys, however immodest : would
we did not spoil our own children and overthrow their
manners ourselves by too much Indulgence. To breed
them at home is to breed them in a shade ; where in
a school they have the light and heat of the Sun.
They are used and accustomed to things and men.
When they come forth into the Commonwealth they
find nothing new or to seek. They have made their
friendships and aids ; some to last till their Age. They
hear what is commanded to others as well as themselves.
Much approved, much corrected ; all which they
bring to their own store and use, and learn as much
as they hear. Eloquence would be but a poor thing if
we should only converse with singulars ; speak but
man and man together. Therefore I like no private
166



BEN JONSON

breeding. I would send them where their industry
should be daily increased by praise ; and that kindled
by emulation. It is a good thing to inflame the mind :
And though Ambition itself be a vice, it is often the
cause of great virtue. Give me that wit, whom praise
excites, glory puts on, or disgrace grieves : he is to be
nourished with Ambition, pricked forward with honour,
checked with Reprehension, and never to be suspected
of sloth. Though he be given to play, it is a sign of
spirit and liveliness ; so there be a mean had of their
sports and relaxations. And from the rod, or ferrule,
I would have them free, as from the menace of them :
for it is both deformed and servile.

Discoveries

JOHN DONNE

1573-1631

113 Death the Leveller

IT comes equally to us all, and makes us all
equal when it comes. The ashes of an Oak
in the Chimney are no Epitaph of that Oak to tell
me how high or how large that was ; it tells me not
what flocks it sheltered while it stood, nor what men
it hurt when it fell. The dust of great persons graves
is speechless too, it says nothing, it distinguishes
nothing : as soon the dust of a wretch whom thou
wouldest not, as of a Prince thou couldest not look
upon, will trouble thine eyes, if the wind blow it
thither ; and when a whirlwind hath blown the dust
of the Churchyard into the Church, and the man
sweeps out the dust of the Church into the Church-
yard, who will undertake to sift those dusts again, and
to pronounce, This is the Patrician, this is the noble

167



JOHN DONNE



flower, and this the yeomanly, this the Plebeian bran.
So is the death of Jesabel (Jesabel was a Queen)
expressed ; They shall not say, this is Jesabel ; not
only not wonder that it is, nor pity that it should be,
but they shall not say, they shall not know, This is
Jesabel.

LXXX Sermons : Sermon XV

114 <?All 'Times are Qod's Seasons

GOD made Sun and Moon to distinguish seasons,
and day, and night, and we cannot have the
fruits of the earth but in their seasons : But God
hath made no decree to distinguish the seasons of his
mercies ; In paradise, the fruits were ripe, the first
minute, and in heaven it is alwaies Autumne, his
mercies are ever in their maturity. We ask fanem
quotidianum, our daily bread, and God never sayes
you should have come yesterday, he never sayes you
must againe to morrow, but to day if you will heare
his voice, to day he will heare you. If some King of the
earth have so large an extent of Dominion, in North,
and South, as that he hath Winter and Summer
together in his Dominions, so large an extent East
and West, as that he hath day and night together in
his Dominions, much more hath God mercy and judge-
ment together : He brought light out of darknesse,
not out of a lesser light ; he can bring thy Summer
out of Winter, though thou have no Spring ; though in
the wayes of fortune, or understanding, or conscience,
thou have been benighted till now, wintred and fro-
zen, clouded and eclypsed, damped and benummed,
smothered and stupefied till now, now God comes
to thee, not as in the dawning of the day, not as in
168



JOHN DONNE

the bud of the spring, but as the Sun at noon to
illustrate all shadows, as the sheaves in harvest, to fill
all penuries, all occasions invite his mercies, and all
times are his seasons.

LXXX Sermons : Sermon 11.

115 Hearts

MY God, my God, all that thou askest of mee, is my
Heart, My Sonne, give mee thy heart ; Am I thy
sonne, as long as I have but my heart i Wilt thou give
mee an Inheritance, a Filiation, any thing for my
heart I O thou, who saydst to Satan, Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him
upon the earth, shall my feare, shall my zeale, shall
my jealousie, have leave to say to thee, Hast thou
considered my Heart, that there is not so perverse
a Heart upon earth ; and wouldst thou have that,
and shall I be thy Sonne, thy eternal Sonne's Coheire,
for giving that i The Heart is deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked ; who can know it ?
Hee that askes that question, makes the answere,
/ the Lord search the Heart. When didst thou search
mine f Dost thou thinke to finde it, as thou madest
it in Adam f Thou hast searched since, and found
all these gradations in the ill of our Hearts, That every
imagination of the thoughts of our hearts, is only evill
continually. Doest thou remember this, and wouldest
thou have my Heart ? O God of all light, I know thou
knowest all ; and it is Thou, that declarest unto man,
what is his Heart. Without thee, soveraigne
goodnesse, I could not know, how ill my heart were.
Thou hast declared unto mee, in thy Word, that for
all this deluge of evill, that hath surrounded all Hearts,

169



JOHN DONNE

yet thou soughtest and foundest a man after thine ozone
heart ; That thou couldest and wouldest give thy people
Pastours according to thine ozone heart ; And I can
gather out of thy Word so good testimony of the
hearts of men, as to find single hearts, docile and
apprehensive hearts ; Hearts that can, Hearts that
have learnt , wise hearts, in one place, and in another,
in a great degree, wise, perfit hearts ; straight hearts,
no perversnesse without, and cleane hearts, no foul-
nesse within ; such hearts I can find in thy Word ;
and if my heart were such a heart, I would give thee
my Heart. But I find stonie hearts too, and I have
made mine such : I have found Hearts, that are
snares ; and I have conversed with such ; hearts that
burne like Ovens ; and the fuell of Lust, and Envie,
and Ambition, hath inflamed mine. . . The first kind
of heart, alas, my God, I have not ; the last are not
Hearts to be given to thee ; What shall I do ? Without
that present I cannot bee thy Sonne, and I have it
not. To those of the first kinde thou givest joyfulnes
of heart, and I have not that ; To those of the other
kinde, thou givest famtnesse of heart : And blessed
bee thou, O God, for that forbearance, I have not
that yet. There is then a middle kinde of Hearts,
not so perfit as to bee given, but that the very giving
mends them ; Not so desperate, as not to bee accepted,
but that the very accepting dignifies them. This is
a melting heart, and a troubled heart ; and a wounded
heart, and a broken heart, and a contrite heart ; and
by the powerfull working of thy piercing Spirit, such
a Heart I have ; Thy Samuel spake unto all the house
of thy Israel, and sayd, If you returne to the Lord with
all your hearts, prepare your hearts unto the Lord. If
my heart bee prepared, it is a returning heart ; And
170



JOHN DONNE



if thou see it upon the way, thou wilt carrie it home
. . and the Peace of God, which passeth all under-
standing, shall keepe my Heart and Mtnde through
Christ Jesus.

Devotions upon Emergent Occasions

116 The "Bell

PERCHANCE hee for whom this Bell tolls, may
be so ill, as that he knowes not it tolls for him ;
And perchance I may thinke my selfe so much better
than I am, as that they who are about mee, and see
my state, may have caused it to toll for mee, and I
know not that. The Church is Cathohke, universall,
so are all her Actions ; All that she does, belongs to
all. When she baptizes a child, that action concernes
mee ; for that child is thereby connected to that
Head which is my Head too, and engraffed into that
body, whereof I am a member. And when she buries
a Man, that action concernes me : ... As therefore
the Bell that rings to a Sermon, calls not upon the
Preacher onely, but upon the Congregation to come ;
so this Bell calls us all : but how much more mee,
who am brought so neere the doore by this sicknesse.
. . The Bell doth toll for him that thinkes it doth ;
and though it intermit againe, yet from that minute,
that that occasion wrought upon him, hee is united
to God. Who casts not up his Eie to the Sunne when
it rises ? but who takes off his Eie from a Comet when
that breakes out ? Who bends not his eare to any bell,
which upon any occasion rings f but who can remove
it from that bell, which is passing a peece of himselfe
out of this world ? No man is an Hand, intire of it
selfe ; every man is a peece of the Continent, a part

171



JOHN DONNE



of the maine ; if a Clod bee washed away by the Sea,
Europe is the lesse, as well as if a Promontorie were,
as well as if a Manner of thy friends or of i£j»<?
were ; any mans death diminishes me, because I am
involved in Manktnde ; And therefore never send to
know for whom the bell tolls ; It tolls for thee.

Devotions upon Emergent Occasions



ROBERT BURTON

1577-1640

117 'Black Spirits and White

WATER-devils are those Naiades or Water-
nymphs which have been heretofore conversant
about waters and rivers. . . Paracelsus hath several
stories of them that have lived and been married to
mortal men, and so continued for certain years with
them, and after, upon some dislike, have forsaken
them. Such a one was Egena, with whom Numa was
so familiar, Diana, Ceres, &c. Olaus Magnus hath a
long narration of one Hotherus, a King of Sweden, that,
having lost his company, as he was hunting one day,
met with these Water-nymphs or Fairies, and was
feasted by them ; and Hector Boethius, of Macbeth
and Banquo, two Scottish Lords, that, as they were
wandering in the woods, had their fortunes told them
by three strange women. . . Terrestrial devils are
those Lares, Genu, Fauns, Satyrs, Wood-nymphs,
Fohots, Fairies, Robin Goodfellows, Trolli, Sec, which
as they are most conversant with men, so they do
them most harm. . . Some put our Fairies into this
rank, which have been in former times adored with
much superstition, with sweeping their houses, and
173



ROBERT BURTON

setting of a pail of clean water, good victuals, and the
like, and then they should not be pinched, but find
money in their shoes, and be fortunate in their enter-
prises. These are they that dance on heaths and greens.
. . Paracelsus reckons up many places in Germany
where they do usually walk in little coats some two
foot long. A bigger kind there is of them, called with
us Hobgoblins and Robin Goodfellows, that would in
those superstitious times grind corn for a mess of
milk, cut wood, or do any manner of drudgery work.
. . So likewise those . . . that walk about midnight on
great heaths and desert places, which . . . draw men out
of the way, and lead them all night a by-way ... we
commonly call them Pucks. In the deserts of Lop in
Asia such illusions of walking spirits are often perceived,
as you may read in Marco Polo the Venetian his
travels. . . Sometimes they sit by the highway side,
to give men falls, and make their horses stumble and
start as they ride, if you will believe the relation of
that holy man Ketellus, in Nubrigensis, that had an
especial grace to see devils, . . . and talk with them . . .
without offence ; and if a man curse or spur his horse
for stumbling, they do heartily rejoice at it ; with
many such pretty feats.

Anatomy of Melancholy

118 Of Change of zAir

ALTHOUGH our ordinary air be good by nature
XX. or art, yet it is not amiss, as I have said, still to
alter it ; no better Physick for a melancholy man, than
change of air, and variety of places, to travel abroad
and see fashions. Leo Ajer speaks of many of his
countrymen so cured, without all other Physick :

173



ROBERT BURTON



amongst the Negroes, there is such an excellent air, that
if any of them be sick elsewhere, and brought thither, he
is instantly recovered, of which he was often an eye-
witness. Lipsius, Zuinger, and some other, add as
much of oidinary travel. No man, saith Lipsius in an
epistle to Phil. Lanoius, a noble friend of his, now ready
to make a voyage, can be such a stock or stone, whom
that pleasant speculation of countries, cities, towns, rivers,
will not affect. Seneca the Philosopher was infinitely
taken with the sight of Scipto Africanus house, near
Linternum, to view those old buildings, Cisterns, Baths,
Tombs, i$c. And how was Tully pleased with the
sight of Athens, to behold those ancient and fair
buildings, with a remembrance of their worthy
inhabitants. Paulus Aemilius, that renowned Roman
Captain, after he had conquered Perseus, the last King
of Macedonia, and now made an end of his tedious
wars, though he had been long absent from Rome,
and much there desired, about the beginning of
Autumn (as Lwy describes it) made a pleasant pere-
grination all over Greece, accompanied with his son
Scipio, and Atheneus the brother of King Eumenes,
leaving the charge of his army with Sulpitius Gallus.
By Thessaly he went to Delphos, thence to Megaris,
Aulis, Athens, Argos, Lacedaemon, Megalopolis, &c.
He took great content, exceeding delight in that his
voyage, as who doth not that shall attempt the like,
though his travel be ad jactationem magis quam ad
usum reipublicae (as one well observes) to crack, gaze,
see fine sights and fashions, spend time, rather than for
his own or publick good? (as it is to many Gallants
that travel out their best days, together with their
means, manners, honesty, religion) yet it availeth
howsoever. For peregrination charms our senses

174



ROBERT BURTON

with such unspeakable and sweet variety, that some
count him unhappy that never travelled, a kind of
prisoner, and pity his case, that from his cradle to his
old age beholds the same still ; still, still the same,
the same. Insomuch that Rhasts cont. lib. i, Tract. 2,
doth not only commend, but enjoin travel, and such
variety of objects to a melancholy man, and to lie
in divers Inns, to be drawn into several companies :
Montaltus cap. 36, and many Neotericks are of the
same mind. Celsus adviseth him therefore that will
continue his health, to have varium vitae genus,
diversity of callings, occupations, to be busied about,
sometimes to live in the City, sometimes in the Country ;
now to study or work, to be intent, then again to hawk
or hunt, swim, run, ride, or exercise himself. A good
prospect alone will ease melancholy, as Comesius con-
tends, lib. 2, c. 7, de Sale. The Citizens of Barcino,
saith he, otherwise penned in, melancholy, and
stirring little abroad, are much delighted with that
pleasant prospect their city hath into the sea, which
like that of old Athens beside Egma Salamina, and
many pleasant islands, had all the variety of delicious
objects : so are those Neapolitanes, and inhabitants of
Genua, to see the ships, boats, and passengers go by,
out of their windows, their whole cities being sited
on the side of an hill, like Pera by Constantinople, so
that each house almost, hath a free prospect to the
sea, as some part of London to the Thames : or to have
a free prospect all over the city at once, as at Granado
in Spam, and Fez in Africk, the river running betwixt
two declining hills, the steepness causeth each house
almost, as well to oversee, as to be overseen of the rest.
Every country is full of such delightsome prospects,
as well within land, as by sea, as Hermon and Rama in

"5



ROBERT BURTON



Palestina, Colalto in Italy, the top of lagetus or
Acrochorinthus, that old decayed castle in Corinth,
from which Peloponesus, Greece, the Ionian and Aegean
seas were semel et simul at one view to be taken. In
Egypt the square top of the great Pyramis 300 yards
in height, and so the Sultan's Palace in Grand Cairo,
the Country being plain, hath a marvellous fair
prospect as well over Nilus, as that great City, five
Italian miles long, and two broad, by the river side :
from mount Sion in Jerusalem the holy land is of all
sides to be seen : such high places are infinite : with
us those of the best note are Glassenbury Tower,
Bever castle, Rodway Grange, Walsby in Lincolnshire,
where I lately received a real kindness, by the munifi-
cence of the right honorable my noble Lady and
patroness, the Lady Frances Countess Dowager of
Exeter : And two amongst the rest, which I may not
omit for vicinities sake, Oldbury, in the confines of
Warwickshire, where I have often looked about me
with great delight, at the foot of which hill I was born :
And Hanbury in Staffordshire, contiguous to which is
Falde a pleasant Village, and an ancient patrimony
belonging to our family, now in the possession of mine
elder brother William Burton Esquire. Barclay the
Scot commends that of Greenwich tower for one of
the best prospects in Europe, to see London on the one
side, the Thames, ships, and pleasant meadows on the
other. There be those that say as much and more of
St. Mark's steeple in Venice. Yet these are at too
great a distance ; some are especially affected with such
objects as be near, to see passengers go by in some
great Roadway, or boats in a river, in subjec turn jorum
despuere, to oversee a Fair, a Market-place, or out
of a pleasant window into some thoroughfare street
176



ROBERT BURTON

to behold a continual concourse, a promiscuous rout,
coming and going, or a multitude of spectators at
a Theatre, a Mask or some such like show. But I
rove : the sum is this, that variety of actions, objects,
air, places, are excellent good in this infirmity and all
others, good for man, good for beast. Constanttne the
Emperor, lib. 18, cap. 13, ex Leontio, holds it an only
cure for rotten sheep, and any manner of sick cattle.
Laehus a fonte Aegubinus that great Doctor, at the
latter end of many of his consultations (as commonly
he doth set down what success his Physick had) in
melancholy most especially approves of this above
all other remedies whatsoever, as appears consult. 69,
consult. 229, &c. Many other things helped, but change
of air was that which wrought the cure, and. did most good.

Anatomy of Melancholy

THOMAS CORYATE

c. 1577 '-1617

ng i/t 'Theological ^Argument

BUT now I will make relation of that which I
promised in my treatise of Padua, I mean my
discourse with the Jews about their religion. For
when as walking in the Court of the Ghetto, I casually
met with a certaine learned Jewish Rabbin that spake
good Latin, I insinuated myself after some few terms
of compliment into conference with him, and asked
him his opinion of Christ, and why he did not receive
him for his Messias ; he made me the same answer
that the Turk did at Lyons, of whom I have before
spoken, that Christ forsooth was a great Prophet,
and in that respect as highly to be esteemed as any

'77



THOMAS CORYATE



Prophet amongst the Jews that ever lived before
him ; but derogated altogether from his divinity,
and would not acknowledge him for the Messias and
Saviour of the world, because he came so contemptibly,
and not with that pomp and majesty that beseemed
the redeemer of mankind. I replied that we Christians
do, and will even to the effusion of our vital blood
confess him to be the true and only Messias of the
world, seeing he confirmed his Doctrine while he
was here on earth, with such an innumerable multitude
of divine miracles, which did most infallibly testify
his divinity. . . Withal I added that the predictions and
sacred oracles both of Moyses, and all the holy Prophets
of God, aimed altogether at Christ as their only mark,
in regard he was the full consummation of the law and
the Prophets, and I urged a place of Esay unto him
concerning the name Emanuel, and a virgin's con-
ceiving and bearing of a son ; and at last descended
to the persuasion of him to abandon and renounce his
Jewish religion and to undertake the Christian faith,
without the which he should be eternally damned.
He again replied that we Christians do misinterpret
the Prophets, and very perversly wrest them to our
own sense, and for his own part he had confidently
resolved to live and die in his Jewish faith, hoping to
be saved by the observations of Moyses' Law. In the
end he seemed to be somewhat exasperated against me,
because I sharply taxed their superstitious ceremonies.
For many of them are such refractory people that they
cannot endure to hear any terms of reconciliation to
the Church of Christ. . . But to shut up this narration
of my conflict with the Jewish Rabbin, after there had
passed many vehement speeches to and fro betwixt us,
it happened that some forty or fifty Jews more flocked
178



THOMAS CORYATE

about me, and some of them began very insolently to
swagger with me, because I durst reprehend their
religion : Whereupon fearing least they would have
offered me some violence, I withdrew myself by little
and little towards the bridge at the entrance into the
Ghetto, with an intent to fly from them, but by good
fortune our noble Ambassador Sir Henry Wotton
passing under the bridge in his Gondola at that very
time, espied me somewhat earnestly bickering with
them, and so incontinently sent unto me out of his
boat one of his principal Gentlemen Master Beljord
his secretary, who conveyed me safely from these
t unchristian miscreants, which perhaps would have
given me just occasion to forswear any more coming
to the Ghetto.

Coryat's Crudities



SIR THOMAS OVERBURY

1581-1613

120 <tA Fair and Happy <3VLilkmaid

IS a Country Wench, that is so far from making
herself beautiful by art that one look of hers is
able to put all face-physick out of countenance. She
knows a fair look is but a dumb orator to commend
virtue, therefore minds it not. All her excellencies
stand in her so silently, as if they had stolen upon her
without her knowledge. The lining of her apparel
(which is herself) is far better than outsides of tissue :
for though she be not arrayed in the spoil of the silk-
worm, she is decked in innocency, a far better wearing.
She doth not, with lying long abed, spoil both her
complexion and conditions ; nature hath taught her

179



SIR THOMAS OVERBURY

too immoderate sleep is rust to the soul : she rises
therefore with Chanticleer, her dame's cock, and at
night makes the lamb her curfew. In milking a Cow,
and straining the teats through her fingers, it seems that
so sweet a milk-press makes the milk the whiter or
sweeter ; for never came almond glove or aromatic
ointment on her palm to taint it. The golden ears
of corn fall and kiss her feet when she reaps them, as
if they wished to be bound and led prisoners by the
same hand that felled them. Her breath is her own,
which scents all the year long of June, like a new-made
haycock. She makes her hand hard with labour, and
her heart soft with pity ; and when winter evenings
fall early (sitting at her merry wheel) she sings i.
defiance to the giddy wheel of Fortune. She doth all
things with so sweet a grace, it seems ignorance will
not suffer her to do ill, being her mind is to do well.
She bestows her year's wages at next fair ; and in
chusing her garments counts no bravery 1' th' world
like decency. The garden and beehive arc all her
physick and chirurgery, and she lives the longer for
it. She dares go alone, and unfold sheep in the night,
and fears no manner of ill, because she means none :
yet to say truth, she is never alone, for she is still
accompanied with old songs, honest thoughts, and
prayers, but short ones ; yet they have their efficacy,
in that they are not palled with ensuing idle cogitations.
Lastly, her dreams are so chaste that she dare tell
them ; only a Friday's dream is all her superstition :
that she conceals for fear of anger. Thus lives she,
and all her care is she may die in the springtime, to
have store of flowers stuck upon her winding-sheet.

Sir Thomas Overburye His Wife, be.

180



SIR THOMAS OVERBURY



121 <sA Franklin

HIS outside is an ancient Yeoman of England,
though his inside may give arms (with the best
gentleman) and ne'er see the herald. There is no
truer servant in the house than himself Though
he be master, he says not to his servants, ' Go to
field,' but, ' Let us go ; ' and with his own eye doth
both fatten his flock and set forward all manner of
husbandry. He is taught by nature to be contented
with a little ; his own fold yields him both food and
raiment : he is pleased with any nourishment God
sends, whilst curious gluttony ransacks, as it were,
Noah's Ark for food, only to feed the riot of one meal.
He is ne'er known to go to law ; understanding to
be law-bound among men is like to be hide-bound
among his beasts ; they thrive not under it : and that
such men sleep as unquietly as if their pillows were
stuffed with Lawyers' penknives. When he builds, no
poor tenant's cottage hinders his prospect : they are
indeed his Almshouses, though there be painted on
them no such superscription : he never sits up late,
but when he hunts the Badger, the vowed foe of his
Lambs : nor uses he any cruelty, but when he hunts
the hare, nor subtilty, but when he setteth snares
for the Snite or pitfalls for the Blackbird ; nor oppres-
sion, but when in the month of July he goes to the
next river and shears his sheep. He allows of honest
pastime, and thinks not the bones of the dead anything
bruised, or the worse for it, though the country lasses
dance in the churchyard after evensong. Rock Monday,
and the Wake in Summer, Shrovings, the wakeful
catches on Christmas Eve, the Hoky, or Seed-cake,
these he yearly keeps, yet holds them no relics of

181



SIR THOMAS OVERBURY



Popery. He is not so inquisitive after news derived
from the privy closet, when the finding an aerie of
Hawks in his own ground, or the foaling of a Colt
come of a good strain, are tidings more pleasant, more
profitable. He is lord paramount within himself,
though he hold by never so mean a Tenure ; and dies
the more contentedly (though he leave his heir young),
in regard he leaves him not liable to a covetous
Guardian. Lastly, to end him : he cares not when his
end comes, he needs not fear his Audit, for his quietus
is in heaven.

Sir Thomas Overburye His Wife, &c.



LORD HERBERT OF CHERBURY

1583-1648

122 The l^not of 'Ribband

PASSING two or three days here, it happened one
evening that a daughter of the Dutchess of about
10 or 11 years of age, going one evening from the
Castle to walk in the Meadows, my self with divers
Fiench Gentlemen attended her and some Gentle-
women that were with her ; this young Lady wearing
a knot of Ribband on her head, a French Chevalier
took it suddenly and fastned it to his hatband ; the
young lady offended herewith demands her Ribband,
but he refusing to restore it, the young Lady addressing
herself to me, said, Monsieur, I pray get my Ribband
from that gentleman ; hereupon going towards him,
I courteously, with my hat in my hand, desired him
to do me the honor that I may deliver the Lady her
Ribband or Bouquet again ; but he roughly answering
me, Do you think I will give it you, when I have
18a



LORD HERBERT OF CHERBURY



refused it to her ? I replyed, nay then Sir I will make
you restore it by force, whereupon also putting on my
hat and reaching at his, he to save himself ran away,
and after a long course in the Meadow finding that
I had almost overtook him, he turned short, and
running to the young Lady was about to put the
Ribband on her hand, when I seizing upon his arm,
said to the young Lady, it was I that gave it. Pardon
me, quoth she, it is he that gives it me : I said then,
Madam, I will not contradict you, but if he dare say
that I did not constrain him to give it, I will fight
with him. The French gentleman answered nothing
thereunto for the present, and so conducted the young
Lady again to the Castle. The next day I desired
Mr. Aurehan Townsend to tell the French Cavalier
that either he must confess that I constrained him to
restore the Ribband, or fight with me ; but the gentle-
man seeing him unwilling to accept of this Challenge,
went out from the place, whereupon I following him,
some of the gentlemen that belonged to the Constable
taking notice hereof acquainted him therewith, who
sending for the French Cavalier, checked him well for
his Sauciness, in taking the Ribband away from his
grandchild, and afterwards bid him depart his house ;
and this was all that I ever heard of the gentleman
with whom I proceeded in that manner because I
thought my self obliged thereunto by the oath taken
when I was made Knight of the Bath, as I formerly
related upon this occasion.

Life . . . Written by Htmselj



183



JOHN SELDEN

1584-1654

123 Pleasure

PLEASURE is nothing else but the intermission
of pain, the enjoying of something I am in great
trouble for till I have it.

'Tis a wrong way to proportion other men's pleasures
to ourselves. 'Tis like a Child's using a little Bird,
' O poor Bird, thou shalt sleep with me ' ; so lays it
in his bosom, and stifles it with his hot breath ; the
Bird had rather be in the cold air : and yet too 'tis
the most pleasing flattery to like what other men like.

'Tis most undoubtedly true that all men are equally
given to their pleasure ; only thus, one man's pleasure
lies one way, and another's another. Pleasures are all
alike, simply considered in themselves. He that hunts,
or he that governs the Commonwealth, they both
please themselves alike, only we commend that, whereby
we ourselves receive some benefit ; as if a man place
his delight in things that tend to the common good.
He that takes pleasure to hear sermons enjoys himself
as much as he that hears plays ; and could he that
loves plays endeavour to love sermons possibly he might
bring himself to it as well as to any other pleasure.
At first it might seem harsh and tedious, but after-
wards 'twould be pleasing and delightful. So it falls
out in that which is the great pleasure of some men,
tobacco ; at first they could not abide it, and now
they cannot be without it.

While you are upon Earth enjoy the good things
that are here (to that end were they given), and be not
melancholy, and wish yourself in heaven. If a King
should give you the keeping of a castle, with all things
belonging to it, orchards, gardens, &c, and bid you use
1S4



JOHN SELDEN

them, withal promise you after twenty years to remove
you to the Court, and to make you a Privy Councillor ;
if you should neglect your Castle, and refuse to eat of
those fruits, and sit down, and whine, and wish
that I was a Privy Councillor, do you think the King
would be pleased with you ?

Pleasures of meat, drink, clothes, &c, are forbidden
those that know not how to use them ; just as nurses
cry, pah ! when they see a knife in a child's hand ;
they will never say anything to a man.

Table Talk

124 Of a Kjng

A KING is a thing men have made for their own
sakes, for quietness' sake. Just as in a Family one
man is appointed to buy the meat. If every man
should buy, or if there were many buyers, they would
never agree ; one would buy what the other liked not,
or what the other had bought before, so there would
be a confusion. But that charge being committed to
one, he according to his discretion pleases all. If they
have not what they would have one day, they shall
have it the next, or something as good.

The word King directs our eyes. Suppose it had
been consul or dictator. To think all Kings alike is
the same folly as if a consul of Aleppo or Smyrna
should claim to himself the same power that a Consul
at Rome had. What, am not I consul ? Or a Duke of
England should think himself like the duke of Tlorence.
Nor can it be imagined that the word /3<uriA.cvs did
signify a king the same in Greece, as the Hebrew word
*]i?D did with the Jews. Besides, let Divines in their
pulpits say what they will, they in their practice

185



JOHN SELDEN



deny that all is the King's. They sue him, and so does
all the nation, whereof they are a part. What matter
is it then what they preach or talk in the schools ?

Kings are all individuals, this or that King ; there is
no species of kings.

A King that claims privileges in his own kingdom,
because they have them in another, is just as a cook
that claims fees in one lord's house because they are
allowed in another. If the master of the house will
yield them, well and good.

Table Talk



WILLIAM DRUMMOND OF
HAWTHORNDEN

1585-1649

125 lAntmula vagula blandula, hospes
comesque corporis

THEY had their being together, Parts they are of
one reasonable Creature, the harming of the one
is the weakening of the working of the other. What
sweet Contentments doth the Soul enjoy by the
Senses ? They are the Gates and Windows of its
Knowledge, the Organs of its Delight. If it be tedious
to an excellent Player on the Lute, to abide but a few
Months the want 'of One, how much more must the
being without such noble Tools and Engines be painful
to the Soul? And if Two Pilgrims, which have wandered
some few Miles together, have a hearts-grief when
they are near to part, what must the Sorrow be at
parting of Two so loving Friends and never-loathing
Lovers, as are the Body and Soul ?

The Cypresse Grove

186



DRUMMOND OF HAWTHORNDEN



126 Of Dying Young

BUT that, perhaps, which anguisheth thee most,
is to have this glorious Pageant of the World
removed from thee, in the Spring and most delicious
Season of thy Life ; for though to die be usual, to
die young may appear extraordinary. If the present
Fruition of these Things be unprofitable and vain,
What can a long Continuance of them be? If God
had made Life happier, he had also made it longer.
Stranger and new Halcyon, why would thou longer
nestle amidst these unconstant and stormy Waves ?
Hast thou not already suffered enough of this World,
but thou must yet endure more? To live long, is it
not to be long troubled ? But number thy Years,
which are now • » • and thou shalt find, that whereas
Ten have outlived thee, Thousands have not attained
this Age. One Year is sufficient to behold all the
Magnificence of Nature, nay, even One Day and Night ;
for more is but the same brought again. This Sun,
that Moon, these Stars, the varying Dance of the Spring,
Summer, Autumn, Winter, is that very same which
the Golden Age did see. They which have the
longest Time lent them to live in, have almost no Part
of it at all, measuring it either by the Space of Time
which is past, when they were not, or by that which is
to come. Why shouldst thou then care, whether thy
Days be many or few, which, when prolonged to the
uttermost, prove, paralleled with Eternity, as a Tear
is to the Ocean ? To die young, is to do that soon,
and in some fewer Days, which once thou must do ;
it is but the giving over of a Game, that after never
so many Hazards, must be lost.

The Cypresse Grove



187



HENRY HEXHAM

1585 ?-i65<3

12 j The aAssault on Ostend, 7 yanuary
1602

THIS being done, Sir Francis Vere went through
the Sally Port, down into the False Bray. And it
being twilight, called for an old soldier, a Gentleman
of his company, to go out sentinel-perdu, and to
creep out to the strand between two gabions ; giving
him express command that if he saw an enemy, he
should come in unto him silently, without giving any
alarm at all.

He crept upon his belly as far as he could ; and,
at last, discovered Count Farnese, wading and put
over the Old Haven, above their Pile Battery, with
his 2,000 Italians, which were to fall on first : and,
as they waded over, he drew them up into battalions
and divisions : which this Gentleman having discovered,
came silently to Sir Francis Vere, as he had com-
manded him. Who asked him, ' What news ? '

' My Lord,' says he, ' I smell good store of gold
chains, buff jerkins, Spanish cassocks, and Spanish
blades.'

' Ha ! ' says Sir Francis Vere, ' sayest thou me
so ! I hope thou shalt have some of them anon ! '
and giving him a piece of gold, he went up again
through the Sally Port to the top of Sand Hill. Where
he gave express order to Sergeant-Major Carpenter
to go to Helmont, and every man to his charge ; and
not to take any alarm, or shoot off either cannon- or

4 scnttnel-ptriu) as sentry forlorn 18 cassocks) military

cloaks
188



HENRY HEXHAM



musket-shot till he himself gave the signal : and then
to give fire, both with the ordnance and small shot,
as fast as ever they could charge and discharge.

When the enemy had put over his 2,000 Italians ;
he had also a signal, to give notice thereof to the
Count of Bucquoy, that they were ready to fall on :
whose signal was the shot of a cannon from their
Pile Battery into the sea towards his quarters, with
a hollow-holed bullet, which made a humming noise.

When General Vere had got them under the swoop
of his cannon and small shot, he poured a volley of
cannon- and musket-shot upon them, raking through
their battalions, and makes lanes through them upon
the bare strand ; which did so amaze and startle
them, that they were at a non-phis whether they
should fall on or retreat back again. Yet at last taking
courage, and tumbling over the dead bodies, they
rallied themselves and came under the foot of Sand
Hill and along the foot of the Curtain of the Old
Wall, to the very piles that were struck under the
wall, where they began to make ready to send us
a volley.

Which Sir Francis Vere seeing they were a pre-
senting, and ready to give fire upon us, because indeed
all the breast-work and parapet was beaten down flat
to the rampire that day, with their ordnance, and we
standing open to the enemy's shot, commanded all
the soldiers to fall flat down upon the ground, while
the enemy's shot flew like a shower of hail over their
heads : which, for the reasons above said, saved a great
many men's lives.

This being done ; our men rising, saw the enemy
hasting to come up to the breach, and mounting up
the wall of the Old Town. Sir Francis Vere flourish-

189



HENRY HEXHAM



ing his sword, called to them in Spanish and Italian,
Vtennexa ! causing the soldiers, as they climbed up,
to cast and tumble down among them, the firkins of
ashes, the barrels of frize-ruyurs, the ropes, stones,
and brickbats which were provided for them.

The alarm being given, it was admirable to see with
what courage and resolution our men fought. Yea,
the Lord did, as it were, infuse fresh courage and
strength into a company of poor snakes and sick
soldiers, which came running out of their huts up to
the wall to fight their shares ; and the women with
their laps full of powder, to supply them, when they
had shot away all their ammunition.

The fight upon the breach and the Old Town
continued, hotter and hotter, for the space of above
an hour. The enemy fell on, at the same instant, upon
the Porcefic, Helmont, the West Ravelin, and Quar-
riers ; but were so bravely repulsed, that they could
not enter a man.

The enemy fainting, and having had his belly full ;
those on the west side beat a doleful retreat : while
the Lord of Hosts ended our dispute for the town, and
crowned us with victory : and the roaring noise of
our cannon rending the air and rolling along the
superficies of the water, the wind being South and
with us, earned that night the news thereof, to our
friends in England and Holland.

General Vere perceiving the enemy to fall off,
commanded me to run, as fast as ever I could, to
Sergeant-Major Carpenter and the Auditor Fleming,
who were upon Helmont, that they should presently

4 frize-ruyters) Frisian horsemen. The barrel was a defensive
appliance, armed with spikes, to receive cavalry
190



HENRY HEXHAM



open the West Sluice : out of which there ran such
a stream and torrent, through the channel of the West
Haven, that, upon their retreat, it carried away many
of their sound and hurt men into the sea. And besides,
our men fell down our walls after them, and slew
a great many of their men as they retreated. They
took some prisoners, pillaged and stript a great many
[of the killed], and brought in gold chains, Spanish
pistols, buff jerkins, Spanish cassocks, blades, swords,
and targets (among the rest, one wherein was enamelled
in gold, the Seven Worthies worth 700 or 800 guilders).

Among the rest, was that soldier which Sir Francis
Vere had sent out to discover ; who came with as
much booty as ever he could lug, saying, ' Sir Francis
Vere was now as good as his word.'

Sluart Tracts, 1603-1693 (An English Garner)

THOMAS HOBBES

1588-1679

128 Disastrous Effects of an zAjternoon
'"Performance

THE opinions of the world, both in ancient and
later ages, concerning the cause of madness, have
been two. Some, deriving them from the Passions ;
some, from Demons or Spirits, either good or bad,
which they thought might enter into a man, possess
him, and move his organs in such strange and uncouth
manner as madmen use to do. The former sort
therefore called such men, Mad-men : but the Later
called them sometimes Daemoniacks (that is, possessed
10 targets) shields

191



THOMAS HOBBES



with spirits) ; sometimes Energumeni (that is, agitated,
or moved with spirits) ; and now in Italy they are
called not only Pazzi, Mad-men ; but also Sfiritati,
men possessed.

There was once a great conflux of people in Abdera,
a City of the Greeks, at the acting of the Tragedy of
Andromeda, upon an extreme hot day : whereupon
a great many of the spectators falling into Fevers
had this accident from the heat and from the Tragedy
together, that they did nothing but pronounce
Iambics, with the names of Perseus and Andromeda ;
which, together with the Fever, was cured by the
coming on of Winter.

Leviathan

i2g Out of Qivil States, there is always
Warre

HEREBY it is manifest, that during the time men
live without a common Power to keep them all
in awe, they are in that condition which is called
War ; and such a war as is of every man, against every
man. For War consisteth not in Battle only, or the
act of fighting ; but in a tract of time, wherein the
Will to contend by Battle is sufficiently known : and
therefore the notion of Time is to be considered in
the nature of War, as it is in the nature of Weather.
For as the nature of Foul weather heth not in a shower
or two of rain, but in an inclination thereto of many
days together, so the nature of war consisteth not in
actual righting, but in the known disposition thereto
during all the time there is no assurance to the
contrary. All other time is Peace.
192



THOMAS HOBBES



Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of
War, where every man is Enemy to every man, the same
is consequent to the time wherein men live without
other security than what their own strength and their
own invention shall furnish them withal. In such
condition there is no place for Industry, because the
fruit thereof is uncertain : and consequently no
Culture of the Earth : no Navigation, nor use of the
commodities that may be imported by Sea ; no
commodious Building ; no Instruments of moving,
and removing such things as require much force ;
no Knowledge of the face of the Earth ; no account of
Time ; no Arts ; no Letters ; no Society ; and,
which is worst of all, continual fear and danger of
violent death ; and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty,
brutish, and short.

Leviathan

130 The 'Papacy

BUT after this Doctrine, that the Church now
Militant, is the Kingdom of God spoken of in the
Old and New Testament, was received in the World,
the ambition, and canvassing for the Offices that
belong thereunto, and especially for that great Office
of being Christs Lieutenant, and the Pomp of them
that obtained therein the principal Public Charges,
became by degrees so evident that they lost the inward
Reverence due to the Pastoral Function : insomuch
as the Wisest men of them that had any power in the
Civil State needed nothing but the authority of their
Princes to deny them any further Obedience. For,
from the time that the Bishop of Rome had gotten
to be acknowledged for Bishop Universal by pretence
of Succession to St. Peter, their whole Hierarchy, or
2830 H 193



THOMAS HOBBES

Kingdom of Darkness may be compared not unfitly
to the Kingdom of Fairies ; that is, to the old wives
Fables in England, concerning Ghosts and Spirits,
and the feats they play in the night. And if a man
consider the original of this great Ecclesiastical
Dominion he will easily perceive that the Papacy is
no other than the Ghost of the deceased Romane
Empire, sitting crowned upon the grave thereof :
For so did the Papacy start up on a Sudden out of
the Ruins of that Heathen Power.

Leviathan

IZAAK WALTON

1593-1682

131 ^Milkmaid's Song

T fENATOR. On my word, Master, this is a gallant
y Trout, what shall we do with him f

Piscator. Marry e'en eat him to supper : We'll go
to my hostess, from whence we came ; she told me,
as I was going out of door, that my brother Peter,
a good angler and a cheerful companion, had sent
word he would lodge there to-night, and bring a
friend with him. My hostess has two beds, and, I
know, you and I may have the best : we'll rejoice
with my brother Peter and his friend, tell tales, or
sing Ballads, or make a catch, or find some harmless
sport to content us, and pass away a little time without
offence to God or man.

Venator. A match, good Master, let 's go to that
house, for the linen looks white, and smells of Lavender,
and I long to lie in a pair of sheets that smells so : let 's
be going, good Master, for I am hungry again with
fishing.

Piscator. Nay, stay a little, good Scholar. I caught
194



IZAAK WALTON

my last Trout with a worm, now I will put on a
minnow and try a quarter of an hour about yonder
trees for another, and so walk towards our lodging.
Look you Scholar, thereabout we shall have a bite
presently, or not at all : Have with you (Sir !) o' my
word I have hold of him. Oh, it is a great logger-
headed Chub ; come, hang him upon that willow
twig, and let 's be going. But turn out of the way
a little, good Scholar, towards yonder high honeysuckle
hedge : there we'll sit and sing whilst this shower
falls so gently upon the teeming earth, and gives yet
a sweeter smell to the lovely flowers that adorn these
verdant meadows.

Look, under that broad Beech-tree, I sat down,
when I was last this way a-fishing, and the birds
in the adjoining grove seemed to have a friendly
contention with an Echo, whose dead voice seemed
to live in a hollow cave, near to the brow of that
Primrose-hill ; there I sat viewing the silver streams
glide silently towards their centre, the tempestuous
sea ; yet, sometimes opposed by rugged roots, and
pebble stones, which broke their waves, and turned
them into foam : and sometimes I beguiled time by
viewing the harmless Lambs, some leaping securely in
the cool shade, whilst others sported themselves in the
cheerful Sun : and saw others were craving comfort
from the swollen udders of their bleating Dams. As I
thus sat, these and other sights had so fully possessed
my soul with content, that I thought as the Poet has
happily expressed it :

I was for that time lifted above earth ;

And possessed joys not promised in my birth.

As I left this place, and entered into the next field,
a second pleasure entertained me, 'twas a handsome
Milkmaid that had not yet attained so much age and

i9S



IZAAK WALTON



wisdom as to load her mind with any fears of many
things that will never be (as too many men too often
do), but she cast away all care, and sung like a Nightin-
gale : her voice was good, and the Ditty fitted for it ;
'twas that smooth song, which was made by Kit.
Marlow, now at least fifty years ago : and the Milk-
maid's Mother sung an answer to it, which was made
by Sir Walter Rawleigh in his younger days.

They were old-fashioned Poetry, but choicely good,
I think much better than the strong lines that are
now in fashion in this critical age. Look yonder !
on my word, yonder they both be a -milking again,
I will give her the Chub, and persuade them to sing
those two songs to us.

God speed you good woman, I have been a-fishing,
and am going to Bleak-Hall to my bed, and having
caught more fish than will sup myself and my friend,
I will bestow this upon you and your daughter, for
I use to sell none.

Milkwoman. Marry God requite you Sir, and we'll
eat it cheerfully, and if you come this way a-fishing
two months hence, a grace of God I'll give you a silly-
bub of new verjuice, in a new made haycock, for it,
and my Maudlin shall sing you one of her best Ballads ;
for she and I both love all Anglers, they be such honest,
civil, quiet men. The Compleat Angler

132 Qeorge Herbert's Walks to Salisbury

HIS chiefest recreation was Musick, in which
heavenly Art he was a most excellent Master, and
composed many divine Hymns and Anthems, which
he set and sung to his Lute or Viol : and though he
was a lover of retiredness, yet his love of Musick
was such, that he went usually twice every week, on
196



IZAAK WALTON

certain appointed days, to the Cathedral Church in
Salisbury ; and at his return would say, That his
time spent in prayer, and Cathedral Music, elevated
his soul, and was his Heaven upon Earth. But before
his return thence to Bemerton, he would usually sing
and play his part at an appointed private Musick
meeting ; and, to justify this practice, he would often
say, Religion does not banish mirth, but only moderates
and sets rules to it.

And, as his desire to enjoy his Heaven upon Earth
drew him twice every week to Salisbury, so, his walks
thither were the occasion of many accidents to others ;
of which I will mention some few.

In one of his walks to Salisbury he overtook a Gentle-
man, that is still living in that City ; and in their walk
together, Mr. Herbert took a fair occasion to talk with
him, and humbly begged to be excused, if he asked
him some account of his faith ; and said, I do this
the rather, because though you are not of my parish,
yet I receive tithe from you by the hand of your
Tenant ; and, Sir, I am the bolder to do it, because I
know there be some Sermon-hearers that be like those
fishes, that always live in salt water, and yet are always
fresh.

After which expression, Mr. Herbert asked him
some needful Questions, and having received his
answer, gave him such rules for the trial of his sincerity,
and for a practical piety, and in so loving and meek
a manner, that the Gentleman did so fall in love with
him, and his discourse, that he would often contrive
to meet him in his walk to Salisbury, or to attend him
back to Bemerton ; and still mentions the name of
Mr. George Herbert with veneration, and still praiseth
God that he knew him.

In another walk to Salisbury, he saw a poor man with

197



IZAAK WALTON

a poorer horse, that was fallen under his load : they
were both in distress and needed present help ; which
Mr. Herbert perceiving, put off his canonical coat,
and helped the poor man to unload, and after to load
his horse. The poor man blessed him for it, and he
blessed the poor man ; and was so like the good-
Samaritan, that he gave him money to refresh both
himself and his horse ; and told him, That if he loved
himself, he should be merciful to his beast. Thus he
left the poor man : and at his coming to his musical
friends at Salisbury, they began to wonder that
Mr. George Herbert, which used to be so trim and
clean, came into that company so soiled and discom-
posed ; but he told them the occasion. And when
one of the company told him, He had disparaged
himself by so dirty an employment, his answer was,
That the thought of what he had done, would prove
Musick to him at midnight ; and that the omission
of it would have upbraided and made discord in his
conscience, whensoever he should pass by that place :
for if I be bound to pray for all that be in distress, I am
sure that I am bound, so far as it is in my power, to
practise what I pray for. And though I do not wish
for the like occasion every day, yet let me tell you,
I would not willingly pass one day of my life, without
comforting a sad soul, or showing mercy ; and I praise
God for this occasion. And now let us tune our
Instruments. Life of George Herbert

133 Portrait of John Donne

HE was of stature moderately tall ; of a straight
and equally proportioned body, to which all his
words and actions gave an unexpressible addition of
comeliness.



198



IZAAK WALTON



The melancholy and pleasant humour were in him
so contempered, that each gave advantage to the other,
and made his company one of the delights of Mankind.

His fancy was inimitably high, equalled only by his
great wit ; both being made useful by a commanding
judgement.

His aspect was chearful, and such as gave a silent
testimony of a clear knowing soul, and of a Conscience
at peace with itself.

His melting eye showed that he had a soft heart,
full of noble compassion ; of too brave a soul to offer
injuries, and too much a Christian not to pardon
them in others.

He did much contemplate (especially after he en-
tered into his Sacred Calling) the mercies of Almighty
God, the immortality of the Soul, and the joys of
heaven ; and would often say in a kind of sacred
ecstasy, ' Blessed be God that he is God, only and
divinely like Himself.'

He was by nature highly passionate, but more apt
to reluct at the excesses of it. A great lover of the
offices of humanity, and of so merciful a spirit, that he
never beheld the miseries of Mankind without pity
and relief.

He was earnest and unwearied in the search of
knowledge, with which his vigorous soul is now
satisfied, and employed in a continual praise of that
God that first breathed it into his active body ; that
body, which once was a Temple of the Holy Ghost
and is now become a small quantity of Christian
dust : — But I shall see it reanimated.

Life of John Donne



199



IZAAK WALTON



134 The 'Judicious Hooker makes an
Injudicious ^Marriage

AND by this [marriage] the good man was drawn from
JLx. the tranquillity of his college ; from that Garden
of Piety, of Pleasure, of Peace, and a sweet Conversa-
tion, into the thorny wilderness of a busy world ; into
those corroding cares that attend a married priest,
and a Country Parsonage ; which was Drayton-
Beauchamf in Buckinghamshire, not far from Ayles-
bury, and in the diocese of Lincoln ; to which he was
presented by John Cheney, Esq. — then patron of it —
the 9th of December 1584, where he behaved himself
so as to give no occasion of evil, but as St. Paul adviseth
a Minister of God — in much patience, in afflictions,
in anguishes, in necessities, in poverty, and no doubt
in long-suffering ; yet troubling no man with his
discontents and wants.

And in this condition he continued about a year ;
in which time his two Pupils, Edwin Sandys and
George Cranmer, took a journey to see their tutor ;
where they found him with a book in his hand (it was
the Odes of Horace) he being then like humble and
innocent Abel, tending his small allotment of sheep
in a common field ; which he told his Pupils he was
forced to do then, for that his servant had gone home
to dine, and assist his Wife to do some necessary
household business. But when his servant returned
and released him, then his two Pupils attended him
unto his house, where their best entertainment was
his quiet company, which was presently denied them ;
for Richard was called to rock the cradle ; and the rest
of their welcome was so like this, that they stayed but
till next morning, which was time enough to discover
and pity their Tutor's condition ; and having in
200



IZAAK WALTON



that time rejoiced in the remembrance, and then
paraphrased on many of the innocent recreations of
their younger days, and other like diversions, and there-
by given him as much present comfort as they were
able, they were forced to leave him to the company
of his wife "Joan, and seek themselves a quieter Lodging
for next night. But at their parting from him,
Mr. Cranmer said, Good tutor, I am sorry your lot
is fallen in no better ground, as to your Parsonage ;
and more sorry that your Wife proves not a more
comfortable Companion, after you have wearied
yourself in your restless studies. To whom the good
man replied, My dear George, if saints have usually
a double share in the miseries of this life, I, that am
none, ought not to repine at what my wise Creator
hath appointed for me : but labour, as indeed I do
daily, to submit mine to his will, and possess my soul
in patience and peace.

Life of Richard Hooker

13$ Sir Henry Wot ton

HE yearly went also to Oxford. But the Summer
before his death he changed that for a journey
to Winchester College, to which school he was first
removed from Bocton. And as he returned from
W inchester towards Eaton College, said to a friend, his
companion in that journey : ' How useful was that
advice of a holy Monk, who persuaded his friend to
perform his customary devotions in a constant place,
because in that place we usually meet with those very
thoughts which possessed us at our last being there !
And I find it thus far experimentally true, that at
my now being in that School, and seeing that very place
where I sat when I was a boy, occasioned me to

201



IZAAK WALTON



remember those very thoughts of my youth which
then possessed me ; sweet thoughts indeed, that
promised my growing years numerous pleasures, with-
out mixtures of cares : and those to be enjoyed, when
time (which I therefore thought slow-paced) had
changed my youth into manhood. But age and experi-
ence have taught me that those were but empty hopes.
And though my dayes have been many, and those
mixt with more pleasures, than the sons of men do
usually enjoy : yet I have always found it true, as my
Saviour did foretell, Sufficient for the day is the evil
thereof. Nevertheless, I saw there a succession of boys
using the same recreations, and, questionless, possessed
with the same thoughts that then possessed me. Thus
one generation succeeds another, both in their lives,
recreations, hopes, fears, and deaths.' 1

Ltfe of Str Henry m Wotton

JAMES HOWELL

i 594-1 666

136 The Tied Tiper

SIR, — I saw such prodigious things daily done these
few years that I had resolved with myself to give
over wondering at anything ; yet a passage happened
this week that forced me to wonder once more, because
it is without parallel. It was that some odd fellows
went skulking up and down London streets, and with
Figs and Raisins allured little Children, and so pur-
loined them away from their Parents and carried them
a Shipboard for beyond Sea, where by cutting their
Hair and other devices they so disguised them that
their Parents could not know them. This made me
think upon that miraculous passage in Hamelen, a
town in Germany, which I hoped to have passed

202



JAMES HOWELL



through when I was in Hamburg, had we returned by
Holland ; which was thus (nor would I relate it unto
you were there not some ground of truth for it) :
The said town of Hamelen was annoyed with Rats
and Mice ; and it chanced that a Pied-coated Piper
came thither who covenanted with the chief Burghers
for such a reward if he could free them quite from
the said Vermin, nor would he demand it till a twelve-
month and a day after. The agreement being made,
he began to plav on his Pipes and all the Rats and the
Mice followed him to a great lough hard by, where they
all perished ; so the Town was infected no more. At
the end of the year the Pied-Piper returned for his
reward ; the Burghers put him off with slightings and
neglect, offering him some small matter, which he
refusing and staying some days in the Town, on Sunday
morning at High Mass, when most people were at
church, he fell to play on his Pipes, and all the children
up and down followed him out of the Town to a great
Hill not far off, which rent in two and opened, and let
him and the children in and so closed up again. This
happened a matter of 250 years since, and in that
town they date their Bills and Bonds and other Instru-
ments in law to this day from the year of the going
out of their children. Besides there is a great pillar
of stone at the foot of the said Hill whereon this story
is engraven.

No more now, for this is enough in conscience for
one time. So I am your most affectionate Servitor.

J. H.

Fleet, 1 Octo. 1643.

Epistolae Ho-Elianae : Familiar Letters



203



JOHN EARLE

1601-1665

137 ty 'tld

IS a Man in a small Letter, yet the best copy of
Adam before he tasted of Eve or the apple ; and
he is happy whose small practice in the world can
only write this Character. He is nature's fresh picture
newly drawn in oil, which time, and much handling,
dims and defaces. His Soul is yet a white paper
unscribbled with observations of the world, wherewith,
at length, it becomes a blurred notebook. He is
purely happy, because he knows no evil, nor hath
made means by sin to be acquainted with misery.
He arrives not at the mischief of being wise, nor
endures evils to come, by foreseeing them. He kisses
and loves all, and, when the smart of the rod is past,
smiles on his beater. Nature and his Parents alike
dandle him, and 'tice him on with a bait of sugar to
a draught of wormwood. He plays yet, like a young
Prentice the first day, and is not come to his task of
melancholy. All the language he speaks yet is tears,
and they serve him well enough to express his necessity.
His hardest labour is his tongue, as if he were loath
to use so deceitful an Organ ; and he is best company
with it when he can but prattle. We laugh at his
foolish sports, but his game is our earnest; and his
drums, rattles, and hobby-horses, but the Emblems
and mocking of man's business. His father hath writ
him as his own little story, wherein he reads those
days of his life that he cannot remember, and sighs
to see what innocence he has out-lived. The elder
he grows, he is a stair lower from God ; and, like his
first father, much worse in his breeches. He is the
Christian's example, and the_ old man's relapse ; the
one imitates his pureness, and the other falls into his
304



JOHN EARLE

simplicity. Could he put off his body with his little
coat, he had got eternity without a burthen, and
exchanged but one Heaven for another.

Mtcrocosmographte

138 aA She Precise Hypocrite

IS one in whom good Women suffer, and have their
truth misinterpreted by her folly. She is one, she
knows not what herself if you ask her, but she is indeed
one that has taken a toy at the fashion of Religion, and
is enamoured of the new fangle. She is a Noncon-
formist in a close stomacher and Ruff of Geneva Print,
and her purity consists much in her Linen. . . . Her
devotion at the Church is much in the turning up
of her eye ; and turning down the leaf in her Book,
when she hears named Chapter and Verse. When she
comes home, she commends the Sermon for the
scripture, and two hours. She loves Preaching better
than Praying, and of Preachers, Lecturers ; and thinks
the Weekday's Exercise far more edifying than the
Sunday's. Her oftest Gossipings are Sabbath-day's
journeys, where (though an enemy to Superstition)
she will go in Pilgrimage five miles to a silenced
Minister, when there is a better Sermon in her own
Parish. She doubts of the Virgin Mary's Salvation,
and dare not Saint her, but knows her own place in
heaven as perfectly as the Pew she has a key to. She is
so taken up with faith she has no room for charity, and
understands no good Works but what are wrought on
the Sampler. She accounts nothing Vices but Super-
stition and an Oath, and thinks Adultery a less sin than
to swear ' by my Truly '. She rails at other Women by
the names of Jezebel and Delilah ; and calls her own
daughters Rebecca and Abigail, and not Ann but
Hannah. . . . She overflows so with the Bible, that she

205



JOHN EARLE

spills it upon every occasion, and will not cudgel
her Maids without Scripture. It is a question whether
she is more troubled with the Devil, or the Devil
with her : she is always challenging and daring him,
and her weapons are Spells no less potent than different,
as being the sage Sentences of some of her own
Sectaries. Nothing angers her so much as that
Women cannot preach, and in this point only thinks
the Brownist erroneous ; but what she cannot at
the Church she does at the Table, where she prattles
more than any against sense and Antichrist, till a
Capon's wing silence her. She expounds the priests
of Baal, reading ministers, and thinks the salvation
of that parish as desperate as the Turks. She is a main
derider to her capacity of those that are not her
Preachers, and censures all sermons but bad ones. . . .
Her conscience is like others' lust, never satisfied, and
you might better answer Scotus than her Scruples.
She is one that thinks she performs all her duty to
God in hearing, and shows the fruits of it in talking.
She is more fiery against the Maypole than her husband,
and thinks he might do a Phineas's Act to break the
pate of the fiddler. She is an everlasting Argument ;
but I am weary of her.

Microcosmographie

JOHN HOLLOND

fi. 1638

139 z£ Discourse of the ZAQavy

IF either the honour of a nation, commerce or trade
with all nations, peace at home, grounded upon
our enemies' fear or love of us abroad, and attended
with plenty of all things necessary either for the
preservation of the public weal or thy private welfare,
be things worthy thy esteem (though it may be beyond
13 reading ministers) ministers who use the Prayer-book
206



JOHN HOLLOND

thy shoal conceit), then next to God and the King
give thy thanks for the same to the navy, as the
principal instrument whereby God works these good
things to thee. As for honour, who knows not (that
knows anything) that in all records of late times of
actions chronicled to the everlasting fame and renown
of this kingdom, still the naval part is the thread that
runs through the whole wooft, the burden of the
song, the scope of the text ? that whereby Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory immortalized her name
by her many great victories obtained over all her
enemies, neighbours or remote dwellers ; King James
of ever blessed memory by almost silent commands
commanded the silence, if not the love, of all neigh-
bouring nations ; and that whereby our ever blessed
Charles, when his abused patience began to be slighted
(as that his power on the seas and 'right to the seas
began thereby to be questioned), hath not only by
his late expeditions of 1635, 1636, 1637, and 1638,
quelled foreign insolencies, regained our almost lost
power and honour, silenced homebred malcontents,
but also settled his kingdoms in peace, commerce, and
plenty, the common attendants of so wise and honour-
able a government ?

As for commerce and trade, go to the Custom House,
inquire and satisfy thyself in the exportations and
importations of this kingdom for that part, and compare
them with former precedents, and see if they do not
exceed by much all former collections ; then ask the
ground of that so great trade by the English with all
nations, and by all nations with the English. It is
even money that his Majesty being master of the seas
is put for all other reasons, or if not, yet made a main
reason among others. Know the body by the foot,
and conceive thus with thyself. If it be thus much
augmented in so few years at such a petty port where

2D7



JOHN HOLLOND

thou livest, what and how much is it increased in
Dover, London, or the whole kingdom f Whence is
it that sundry nations that are enemies amongst
themselves are all friends to the English ? that we
can, and do, convoy all French and Dutch bottoms
to their several ports, and protect them from the
fear and annoyance of the Spanish party ; and on
the contrary, all Spanish and Dunkirk bottoms to
their several ports, and protect them from the en-
counter of the French and Dutch parties ? How comes
it to pass that when both parties are under the tuition
of any of his Majesty's castles or ships, neither party
dare disturb the quiet of each other till they be both
out of protection ? What occasioned the transmission
of so much Spanish coin and plate to be either new
minted here, or at least transmitted hence, by and
under the convoy of his Majesty's ships ? I could
instance in many more particulars, were it not to
prove it day at noon ; suffice it thus far, nothing under
God, who doth all, hath brought so much, so great
commerce to this kingdom as the rightly noble
employments of our navy ; a wheel, if truly turned,
that sets to work all Christendom by its motion ;
a mill, if well extended, that in a sweet yet sovereign
composure contracts the grist of all nations to its own
dominions, and requires only the tribute of its own
people, not for, but towards, its maintenance.

Mr. Hollond : His First Discourse of the Navy

OWEN FELLTHAM

1602 ?-i668

140 Of T're aching

THE excess which is in the defect of Preaching has
made the pulpit slighted ; I mean the much bad
oratory we find it guilty of. 'Tis a wonder to me how
208



OWEN FELLTHAM

men can preach so little, and so long : so long a time,
and so little matter ; as if they thought to please by
the inculcation of their vain Tautologies. I see no
reason that So high a Princess as Divinity is should
be presented to the people in the sordid rags of the
tongue ; nor that he which speaks from the Father
of Languages should deliver his embassage in an ill
one. A man can never speak too well while he speaks
not too obscure. Long and distended clauses are both
tedious to the ear and difficult for their retaining.
A Sentence well couched takes both the sense and the
understanding. I love not those Cart-rope speeches
that are longer than the memory of man can fathom.
I see not but that Divinity, put into apt significants,
might ravish as well as poetry. The weighty lines
men find upon the Stage, I am perswaded, have been
the lures to draw away the Pulpit's followers. We
complain of drowziness at a Sermon ; when a Play of
a doubled length leads us on still with alacrity. But
the fault is not all in ourselves. If we saw Divinity
acted, the gesture and variety would as much invigilate.
But it is too high to be personated by Humanity. . .

A good orator should pierce the ear, allure the eye,
and invade the mind of his hearer. And this is Seneca's
opinion : fit words are better than fine ones : I like
not those that are injudiciously made ; but such as be
expressively significant, that lead the mind to some-
thing beside the naked term. And he that speaks
thus must not look to speak thus every day. A kembed
Oration will cost both sweat and the rubbing of the
brain. And kembed I wish it, not frizzled nor curled.
Divinity should not lasciviate. „ ,



209



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



Of ^Heligious Qivility



1605-1682



141



I AM, I confess, naturally inclined to that which
misguided zeal terms superstition ; my common
conversation I do acknowledge austere, my behaviour
full of rigour, sometimes not without morosity ; yet
at my devotion I love to use the civility of my knee,
my hat, and hand, with all those outward and sensible
motions which may express or promote my invisible
devotion. I should violate my own arm rather than
a Church, nor willingly deface the memory of Saint or
Martyr. At the sight of a Cross or Crucifix I can
dispense with my hat, but scarce with the thought or
memory of my Saviour ; I cannot laugh at but rather
pity the fruitless journeys of Pilgrims, or contemn the
miserable condition of Friars ; for though misplaced
in circumstance, there is something in it of devotion :
I could never hear the Ave Mane Bell without an
elevation, or think it a sufficient warrant, because they
erred in one circumstance, for me to err in all, that is in
silence and dumb contempt.



IT is my temper, and I like it the better, to affect
all harmony ; and sure there is musick even in the
beauty, and the silent note which Cupid strikes, far
sweeter than the sound of an instrument. For there is
a musick wherever there is a harmony, order, or
proportion ; and thus far we may maintain the musick
of the spheres ; for those well-ordered motions and
regular paces, though they give no sound unto the
ear, yet to the understanding they strike a note most
full of harmony. Whatsoever is harmonically com-



Rehgio Medici



142




Harmony



210



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



posed delights in harmony ; which makes me much
distrust the symmetry of those heads which declaim
against all Church musick. For myself, not only from
my obedience but my particular genius, I do embrace
it ; for even that vulgar and Tavern Musick, which
makes one man merry, another mad, strikes in me a
deep fit of devotion, and a profound contemplation
of the first Composer : there is something in it of
Divinity more than the ear discovers. It is an hiero-
glyphical and shadowed lesson of the whole world and
Creatures of God, such a melody to the ear as the
whole world, well understood, would afford the under-
standing. In brief, it is a sensible fit of that Harmony
which intellectually sounds in the ears of God.

Rehgto Medici

143 Sleep

WE term sleep a death, and yet it is waking that
kills us, and destroys those spirits that are the
house of life. 'Tis indeed a part of life that best
expresseth death, for every man truly lives so long
as he acts his nature, or someway makes good the
faculties of himself : Themistocles therefore that slew
his Soldier in his sleep was a merciful executioner,
'tis a kind of punishment the mildness of no laws hath
invented ; I wonder the fancy of Lucan and Seneca
did not discover it. It is that death by which we may
be literally said to die daily, a death which Adam died
before his mortality ; a death whereby we live a middle
and moderating point between life and death ; in
fine, so like death, I dare not trust it without my
prayers, and an half adieu unto the world, and take
my farewell in a Colloquy with God.

The night is come like to the day,
Depart not thou great God away.

211



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



Let not my sins, black as the night,
Eclipse the lustre of thy light.
Keep still in my Horizon, for to me,
The Sun makes not the day, but thee.
Thou whose nature cannot sleep,
On my temples sentry keep ;
Guard me 'gainst those watchful foes,
Whose eyes are open while mine close.
Let no dreams my head infest,
But such as Jacobs temples blest.
While I do rest, my soul advance,
Make my sleep a holy trance
That I may, my rest being wrought,
Awake into some holy thought.
And with as active vigour run
My course, as doth the nimble Sun.
Sleep is a death, O make me try,
By sleeping what it is to die.
And as gently lay my head
On my Grave, as now my bed.
How ere I rest, great God let me
Awake again at last with thee.
And thus assured, behold I he
Securely, or to wake or die.
These are my drowsy days, in vain
I do now wake to sleep again.
come that hour, when I shall never
Sleep again, but wake for ever

This is the dormitive I take to bedward, I need no
other Laudanum than this to make me sleep ; after
which I close mine eyes in security, content to take
my leave of the Sun, and sleep unto the resurrection.

Rehgio Medici



112



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



144 'Pu/vis et umbra sumus

I

NOW since these dead bones have already out-
lasted the living ones of Methuselah, and in
a Yard under Ground, and thin Walls of Clay, out-
worn all the strong and specious buildings above it,
and quietly rested under the drums and tramplings of
three Conquests ; What Prince can promise such
diuturnity unto his Relics, or might not gladly say,

Sic ego comfoni versus in ossa velim ?

Time which antiquates Antiquities, and hath an art
to make dust of all things, hath yet spared these
minor Monuments. In vain we hope to be known
by open and visible Conservatories, when to be
unknown was the means of their continuation, and
obscurity their protection.

II

What Song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles
assumed when he hid himself among Women, though
puzzling Questions, are not beyond all conjecture.
What time the Persons of these Ossuaries entered the
famous Nations of the dead, and slept with Princes and
Counsellors, might admit a wide solution. But who
were the proprietaries of these bones, or what bodies
these ashes made up, were a question above Anti-
quarism. Not to be resolved by Man nor easily
perhaps by Spirits, except we consult the Provincial
Guardians or Tutelary Observators. Had they made
as good provision for their Names, as they have done
for their Relics, they had not so grossly erred in the art
of perpetuation. But to subsist in bones, and be but
Pyramidally extant, is a fallacy in duration. Vain

213



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



ashes, which in the oblivion of Names, Persons, Times,
Sexes, have found unto themselves a fruitless continua-
tion, and only arise unto late posterity as Emblems of
mortal vanities ; Antidotes against pride, vainglory,
and madding vices.

Ill

But the iniquity of oblivion blindly scattereth her
Poppy, and deals with the memory of Men without
distinction to merit of perpetuity. Who can but pity
the Founder of the Pyramids ? Herostratus lives that
burnt the Temple of Diana, he is almost lost that built
it ; Time hath spared the Epitaph of Adrian's Horse,
confounded that of himself. In vain we compute
our felicities by the advantage of our good Names since
bad have equal durations ; and T her sites is like to
live as long as Agamemnon. Who knows whether the
best of Men be known ? or whether there be not more
remarkable Persons forgot, than any that stand
remembered in the known account of Time ? Without
the favour of the everlasting Register the first Man
had been as unknown as the last, and Methuselah's
long life had been his only Chronicle.

Oblivion is not to be hired : The greater part must
be content to be as though they had not been, to be
found in the Register of God, not in the Record of
Man. Twenty-seven Names make up the first Story,
and the recorded Names ever since contain not one
living Century. The number of the dead long
exceedeth all that shall live. The night of Time far
surpasseth the day, and who knows when was the
Equinox? Every hour adds unto that current
Arithmetick, which scarce stands one moment. And
since death must be the Lucma of life, and even Pagans

214



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



could doubt whether thus to live were to die ; Since
our longest Sun sets at right descensions, and makes
but Winter arches, and therefore it cannot be long
before we lie down in darkness, and have our light
in ashes ; Since the Brother of death daily haunts us
with dying Memento's, and Time that grows old
itself bids us hope no long duration : Diuturnity is
a dream and folly of expectation.

IV

There is nothing strictly immortal, but immortality ;
whatever hath no beginning may be confident of
no end. . . But Man is a Noble Animal, splendid in
Ashes, and pompous in the Grave, solemnizing
Nativities and Deaths with equal lustre, nor omitting
Ceremonies of bravery in the infamy of his Nature. . .

To subsist in lasting Monuments, to live in their
productions, to exist in their names, and predicament
of Chimera's, was large satisfaction unto old expecta-
tions, and made one part of their Elysiums. But all
this is nothing in the Metaphysicks of true belief. To
live, indeed, is to be again ourselves, which being not
only an hope but an evidence in noble Believers, 'tis
all one to lie in S. Innocents Churchyard, as in the
Sands of Egypt ; Ready to be anything in the ecstasy
of being ever, and as content with six Foot as the
Moles of Adrianus.

Urn Burial

145 The ^Mystic as Qardener

BUT the Quincunx of Heaven runs low, and 'tis
time to close the five ports of knowledge ; We
are unwilling to spin out our awaking thoughts into
the phantasms of sleep, which often continueth

215



SIR THOMAS BROWNE



precogitations ; making Cables of Cobwebs, and
Wildernesses of handsome Groves. Beside, Hippo-
crates hath spoken so little, and the Oneirocritical
Masters have left such frigid Interpretations from
Plants, that there is little encouragement to dream
of Paradise itself. Nor will the sweetest delight of
Gardens afford much comfort in sleep ; wherein the
dullness of that sense shakes hands with delectable
odours ; and though in the Bed of Cleopatra can
hardly with any delight raise up the ghost of a Rose.

Night, which Pagan Theology could make the
Daughter of Chaos, affords no advantage to the descrip-
tion of order ; Although no lower than that Mass can
we derive its Genealogy. All things began in order,
so shall they end, and so shall they begin again ;
according to the ordainer of order and mystical
Mathematicks of the City of Heaven.

Though Somnus in Homer be sent to rouse up
Agamemnon, I find no such effects in these drowsy
approaches of sleep. To keep our eyes open longer
were but to act our Antipodes. The Huntsmen are
up in America, and they are already past their first
sleep in Persia. But who can be drowsy at that hour
which freed us from everlasting sleep ? or have
slumbering thoughts at that time, when sleep itself
must end, and as some conjecture all shall awake again ?

The Garden of Cyrus

146 The Heroick £Mind

THE Heroical vein of Mankind runs much in the
soldiery and courageous part of the World ; and
in that form we oftenest find men above men. History
is full of the gallantry of that Tribe ; and when we
216



SIR THOMAS BROWNE

read their notable acts, we easily find what a difference
there is between a life in Plutarch and in Laerttus.
Where true Fortitude dwells, Loyalty, Bounty, Friend-
ship, and Fidelity may be found. A man may confide
in persons constituted for noble ends, who dare do
and suffer, and who have a hand to burn for their
Country and their Friend. Small and creeping things
are the product of petty Souls. He is like to be mis-
taken, who makes choice of a covetous Man for a
Friend, or relieth upon the reed of narrow and poltron
Friendship. Pitiful things are only to be found in the
cottages of such Breasts ; but bright Thoughts, clear
Deeds, Constancy, Fidelity, Bounty, and generous
Honesty are the Gems of noble Minds ; wherein, to
derogate from none, the true Heroick English Gentle-
man hath no Peer.

Christian Morals

THOMAS FULLER

1608-1661

147 The True gentleman

HE is extracted from ancient and worshipful parent-
age. When a Pippin is planted on a Pippin
stock, the fruit growing thence is called a Rennet,
a most delicious Apple, as both by Sire and Dam well
descended. Thus his blood must needs be well
purified who is gently born on both sides.

If his birth be not, at least his qualities are generous.
What if he cannot with the Hevenninghams of Suffolk
count five-and-twenty knights of his family, or tell
sixteen knights successively with the Tilneys of Norfolk,
or with the Nauntons show where their Ancestors had
seven hundred pounds a year before or at the Conquest:

217



THOMAS FULLER



yet he hath endeavoured by his own deserts to ennoble
himself. Thus Valour makes him son to Caesar ;
Learning entitles him kinsman to Tully ; and piety
reports him nephew to godly Constantine.

He is not in his youth possessed with the great hopes
of his possession. No flatterer reads constantly in his
ears a survey of the lands he is to inherit. This hath
made many boy's thoughts swell so great, they could
never be kept in compass afterwards. Only his
Parents acquaint him that he is the next undoubted
Heir to correction, if misbehaving himself ; and he
finds no more favour from his Schoolmaster than
his Schoolmaster finds diligence in him, whose rod
respects persons no more than bullets are partial in
a battle.

At the University he is so studious as if he intended
learning for his profession. He knows well that cunning
is no burthen to carry, as paying neither porterage
by land nor poundage by sea. Yea, though to have
land be a good First, yet to have learning is the surest
Second, which may stand to it when the other may
chance to be taken away.

At the Inns of Court he applies himself to learn the
Laws of the kingdom. Object not, Why should a
Gentleman learn law, who if he needeth it may have
it for his money, and if he have never so much of his
own he must but give it away ? For what a shame is
it for a man of quality to be ignorant of Solon in our
Athens, of Lycurgus in our Sparta ? Besides, law will
help him to keep his own, and bestead his neighbours.

He is courteous and affable to his neighbours. As
the sword of the best-tempered metal is most flexible,
so the truly generous are most pliant and courteous
in their behaviour to their inferiors.
218



THOMAS FULLER



He delights to see himself and his servants well
mounted : therefore he loveth good Horsemanship.

He furnisheth and prepareth himself in peace against
time of war ; lest it be too late to learn when his skill
is to be used. He approves himself courageous when
brought to the trial, as well remembering the cus-
tom which is used at the Creation of Knights of the
Bath, wherein the King's Master-Cook cometh forth,
and presenteth his great knife to the new-made
Knights, admonishing them to be faithful and valiant,
otherwise he threatens them that that very knife is
prepared to cut off their spurs.

If the Commission of the Peace finds him out, he
faithfully discharges it. I say, Finds him out, for
a publick Office is a guest which receives the best usage
from them who never invited it. And though he
declined the Place, the country knew to prize his
worth, who would be ignorant of his own. He com-
pounds many petty differences betwixt his neighbours,
which are easier ended in his own Porch than in
Westminster Hall ; for many people think if once
they have fetched a warrant from a Justice, they
have given earnest to follow the suit, though otherwise
the matter be so mean that the next night's sleep
would have bound both parties to the peace, and made
them as good friends as ever before.

Yet He connives not at the smothering of punishable
faults. If chosen a member of Parliament, he is willing
to do his Country service. If he be no rhetorician to
raise affections (yea, Mercury was a greater speaker
than Jupiter himself), he counts it great wisdom to
be the good manager of Yea and Nay. The slow pace
of his judgement is recompensed by the swift following
of his affections, when his judgement is once soundly

219



THOMAS FULLER



informed. And here we leave him in consultation,
wishing him, with the rest of his honourable Society,
all happy success.

The Holy State

148 T/te Qood Sea Qaptain

CONCEIVE him now in a Man-of-war, with his
letters of mart, well armed, victualled, and
appointed, and see how he acquits himself.

The more power he hath, the more careful he is not
to abuse it. Indeed, a Sea Captain is a King in the
Island of a ship, supreme Judge, above appeal, in
causes civil and criminal, and is seldom brought to an
account in Courts of Justice on land for injuries done
to his own men at sea.

He is careful in observing of the Lord's day. He
hath a watch in his heart, though no bells in a steeple
to proclaim that day by ringing to prayers.

He is as pious and thankful when a tempest is past,
as devout when it is present : not clamorous to receive
mercies, and tongue-tied to return thanks.

Escaping many dangers makes htm not presumptuous
to run into them.

In taking a prize he most prizeth the men's lives
whom he takes ; though some of them may chance to
be Negroes or Savages. It is the custom of some to
cast them overboard, and there is an end of them :
for the dumb fishes will tell no tales. But the murder
is not so soon drowned as the men. What ! is a brother
by half-blood no kin ? A Savage hath God to his
father by creation, though not the Church to his
mother, and God will revenge his innocent blood.
220



THOMAS FULLER



But our Captain counts the image of God nevertheless
his image cut in ebony as if done in ivory, and in the
blackest Moors he sees the representation of the
King of heaven.

In dividing the gains he wrongs none who took pains
to get them. Not shifting off his poor mariners
with nothing, or giving them only the garbage of
the prize, and keeping all the flesh to himself. In
time of peace he quietly returns home, and turns not
to the trade of Pirates, who are the worst sea-vermin,
and the devil's water-rats.

His voyages are not only for profit, but some for honour
and knowledge ; to make discoveries of new countries,
imitating the worthy Peter Columbus. . .

Our Sea captain is likewise ambitious to perfect
what the other began. He counts it a disgrace, seeing
all mankind is one family, sundry countries but
several rooms, that we who dwell in the parlour (so
he counts Europe) should not know the outlodgings of
the same house, and the world be scarce acquainted
with itself before it be dissolved from itself at the day
of judgement.

He daily sees and duly considers God's wonders in
the deep.

The Holy State

149 The Qood ^Master of a College

HIS learning, if beneath emmency, is far above
contempt. Sometimes ordinary scholars make
extraordinary good Masters. Every one who can play
well on Apollo's harp cannot skilfully drive his chariot,
there being a peculiar mystery of Government. Yea,

221



THOMAS FULLER



as a little alloy makes gold to work the better, so,
perchance, some dulness in a man makes him fitter
to manage secular affairs ; and those who have
climbed up Parnassus but half way, better behold
worldly business, as lying low and nearer to their
sight, than such as have climbed to the top of the
mount.

He not only keeps the Statutes in his study, but observes
them. For the maintaining of them will maintain
him, if he be questioned.

He is principal Porter, and chief Chapel-monitor. For
where the Master keeps his chamber always, the
scholars will keep theirs seldom, yea, perchance, may
make all the walls of the college to be gates. As for
out-lodgings (like galleries, necessary evils in populous
Churches) he rather tolerates than approves them.

He winds up the Tenants to make good musick, but not
to break them. Sure College-lands were never given
to fat the Tenants and starve the scholars, but that
both might comfortably subsist. Yea, generally I hear
the Muses commended for the best Landladies, and
a College-lease is accounted but as the worst kind of
freehold.

He disdains to nourish dissension among the members
of his house. Let Machiavel's Maxim, Divide et
regnabis, if offering to enter into a College-gate, sink
through the grate and fall down with the dirt. For
besides that the fomenting of such discords agrees
not with a good conscience, each party will watch
advantages, and Pupils will often be made to suffer
for their Tutors' quarrels.

He scorneth the plot to make only dunces Fellows, to
the end he may himself command in chief : as thinking
that they who know nothing will do anything, and so

222



THOMAS FULLER



he shall be a figure amongst cyphers, a bee amongst
drones. Yet oftentimes such Masters are justly met
with, and they find by experience that the dullest
horses are not easiest to be reined. But our Master
endeavours so to order his elections, that every scholar
may be fit to make a Fellow and every Fellow a
Master.

The Holy Stale

150 IFyc/iffe's zAshes

HITHERTO the Corpse of John Wiciliffe had
quietly slept in his grave about one and, fourty
years after his death, till his body was reduced to
bones and his bones almost to dust. . . But now such
the Spleen of the Council of Constance ... as they
ordered his bones (with this charitable caution, if it
may be discerned from the bodies of other faith-
ful people) to be taken out of the ground and thrown
farre off from any Christian buriall. In obedience
hereunto Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincolne Dio-
cesan of Lutterworth sent his Officers ... to ungrave
him accordingly. To Lutterworth they come, Sumner,
Commissarie Official, Chancellour, Proctors, Doctors,
and the Servants (so that the Remnant of the body
would not hold out a bone amongst so many hands)
take what was left out of the grave, and burnt them to
ashes, and cast them into Swift a Neighbouring Brook
running hard by. Thus this Brook hath convey'd his
Ashes into Avon ; Avon into Severn ; Severn into the
narrow Seas ; they, into the main Ocean. And thus
the Ashes of Wickliff are the Emblem of his Doctrine,
which now is dispersed all the World over.

Church History of Britain
223



JOHN MILTON

1608-1674

151 Against Fugitive and Qloistered
Virtue

GOOD and evil we know in the field of this World
grow up together almost inseparably ; and the
knowledge of good is so involved and interwoven with
the knowledge of evil and in so many cunning resem-
blances hardly to be discerned, that those confused
seeds which were imposed on Psyche as an incessant
labour to cull out and sort asunder were not more
intermixed. It was from out the rind of one apple
tasted that the knowledge of good and evil as two twins
cleaving together leapt forth into the World. And
perhaps this is that doom which Adam fell into of
knowing good and evil, that is to say of knowing
good by evil. As therefore the state of man now is,
what wisdom can there be to choose, what continence
to forbeare, without the knowledge of evil f He that
can apprehend and consider vice with all her baits
and seeming pleasures, and yet abstain, and yet distin-
guish, and yet prefer that which is truly better, he
is the true warfaring Christian. I cannot praise
a fugitive and cloistered virtue, unexercised and
unbreathed, that never sallies out and sees her adver-
sary, but slinks out of the race, where that immortal
garland is to be run for not without dust and heat.
Assuredly we bring not innocence into the world,
we bring impurity much rather : that which purifies
us is trial, and trial is by what is contrary.

Areopagitica



324



JOHN MILTON



152 The Tyranny of Licensing

IF we think to regulate Printing, thereby to rectify
manners, we must regulate all recreations and
pastimes, all that is delightful to man. No musick
must be heard, no song be set or sung, but what is
grave and Dorick. There must be licensing dancers,
that no gesture, motion, or deportment be taught
our youth but what by their allowance shall be thought
honest ; for such Plato was provided of. It will ask
more than the work of twenty licencers to examine all
the lutes, the violins, and the guitars in every house ;
they must not be suffered to prattle as they do, but
must be licensed what they may say. And who shall
silence all the airs and madrigals that whisper softness
in chambers ? The Windows also, and the Balconies
must be thought on ; there are shrewd books with
dangerous Frontispieces set to sale ; who shall prohibit
them ? shall twenty licencers ? The villages also must
have their visitors to inquire what lectures the bag-
pipe and the rebeck reads, even to the balladry and
the gamut of every municipal fidler, for these are
the Countryman's Arcadia's and his Monte Mayors. . .
To sequester out of the world into Atlantick and
Eutopian polities, which never can be drawn into use,
will not mend our condition ; but to ordain wisely
as in this world of evil, in the midst whereof God
hath placed us unavoidably.

Areopagilica

153 SVLilton in Italy

AND lest some should persuade ye, Lords and Com-
XX. mons, that these arguments of learned men's
discouragement at this your order, are mere flourishes
2830 1 225



JOHN MILTON

and not real, I could recount what I have seen and
heard in other Countries, where this kind of inquisition
tyrannizes ; when I have sat among their learned men,
for that honour I had, and be'en counted happy to
be born in such a place of Philosophic freedom as they
supposed England was, while themselves did nothing
but bemoan the servile condition into which learning
amongst them was brought ; that this was it which
had damped the glory of Italian wits, that nothing had
been there written now these many years but flattery
and fustian. There it was that I found and visited
the famous Galileo grown old, a prisoner to the
Inquisition, for thinking in Astronomy otherwise than
the Franciscan and Dominican licencers thought.
And though I knew that England then was groaning
loudest under the Prelatical yoke, nevertheless I took
it as a pledge of future happiness, that other Nations
were so persuaded of her liberty.

Areopagitica

154 The Profit of Free Speech to a
Commonwealth

FOR as in a body, when the blood is fresh, the
spirits pure and vigorous not only to vital but to
rational faculties and those in the acutest and the
pertest operations of wit and subtlety, it argues in
what good plight and constitution the body is, so when
the cheerfulness of the people is so sprightly up, as
that it has not only wherewith to guard well its own
freedom and safety but to spare, and to bestow upon
the solidest and sublimest points of controversy and
new invention, it betokens us not degenerated, nor
drooping to a fatal decay, but casting off the old and
226



JOHN MILTON

wrinkled skin of corruption to outlive these pangs and
wax young again, entering the glpnous ways of Truth
and prosperous virtue destined to become great and
honourable in these latter ages. Methinks I see in my
mind a noble and puissant Nation rousing herself
like a strong man after sleep, and shaking her invincible
locks. Methinks I see her as an Eagle mewing her
mighty youth, and kindling her undazzled eyes at
the full midday beam, purging and unsealing her long
abused sight at the fountain itself of heavenly radiance,
while the whole noise of timorous and flocking birds,
with those also that love the twilight, flutter about,
amazed at what she means, and in their envious gabble
would prognosticate a year of sects and schisms.

Areopagtltca

/55 ' Long Closing '

I

TIME serves not now, and perhaps I might seem
too profuse to give any certain account of what
the mind at home in the spacious circuits of her musing
hath liberty to propose to her self, though of highest
hope, and hardest attempting, whether that Epick
form whereof the two poems of Homer, and those
other two of Virgil and lasso are a diffuse, and the
book of Job a brief model : or whether the rules of
Aristotle herein are strictly to be kept, or nature to
be follow'd, which in them that know art, and use
judgement is no transgression, but an innching of
art. And lastly what King or Knight before the
conquest might be chosen in whom to lay the pattern
of a Christian Heroe. And as Tasso gave to a Prince
of Italy his choice whether he would command him

227



JOHN MILTON

to write of Godfreys expedition against the infidels,
or Belisarius against the Gothes, or Charlemain against
the Lombards ; if to the instinct of nature and the
imboldning of art ought may be trusted, and that
there be nothing advers in our climat, or the fate of
this age, it haply would be no rashnesse from an equal
diligence and inclination to present the like offer in
our own ancient stories. Or whether those Dramatick
constitutions, wherein Sophocles and Euripides raigne,
shall be found more doctrinal and exemplary to a
Nation, the Scripture also affords us a divine pastoral
Drama in the Song of Solomon consisting of two
persons and a double Chorus, as Origen rightly judges.
And the Apocalyps of Saint Iohn is the majestick
image of a high and stately tragedy, shutting up and
intermingling her solemn Scenes and Acts with
a sevenfold Chorus of halleluja's and harping
symphonies : and this my opinion the grave autority
of Parens commenting that book is sufficient to
confirm. Or if occasion shall lead to imitate those
magnifick Odes and Hymns wherein Pindarus and
Callimachus are in most things worthy, some others
in their frame judicious, in their matter most and end
faulty : But those frequent songs throughout the law
and prophets beyond all these, not in their divine
argument alone, but in the very critical art of com-
position may be easily made appear over all the kinds
of Lyrick poesy to be incomparable.

II

Neither do I think it shame to covnant with any
knowing reader, that for some few yeers yet I may go
on trust with him toward the payment of what I am
now indebted, as being a work not to be rays'd from
228



JOHN MILTON

the heat of youth, or the vapours of wine, like that
which flows at wast from the pen of some vulgar
Amorist, or the trencher fury of a riming parasite, nor
to be obtain'd by the invocation of Dame Memory
and her Siren daughters, but by devout prayer to that
eternall Spirit who can enrich with all utterance and
knowledge, and sends out his Seraphim with the
hallow'd fire of his Altar to touch and purify the lips
of whom he pleases : to this must be added industrious
and select reading, steddy observation, insight into
all seemly and generous arts and affaires, till which in
some measure be compast, at mine own peril and cost
I refuse not to sustain this expectation from as many
as are not loath to hazard so much credulity upon the
best pledges that I can give them.

Reason of Church Government

EDWARD HYDE, EARL OF
CLARENDON

1609-1674

156 aA Small Qloud in the 9{grth

OF all the Princes of Europe, the King of England
alone seemed to be seated upon that pleasant
Promontory, that might safely view the tragick
Sufferings of all his Neighbours about him, without
any other Concernment, than what arose from his
own princely Heart, and christian Compassion, to
see such Desolation wrought by the Pride, and
Passion, and Ambition of private Persons, supported
by Princes, who knew not what themselves would have.
His three Kingdoms flourishing in entire Peace, and
universal Plenty ; in Danger of nothing but their own

229



EDWARD HYDE



Surfeits ; and his Dominions every Day enlarged, by
sending out Colonies upon large, and fruitful Planta-
tions ; his strong Fleets commanding all Seas ; and
the numerous Shipping of the Nation bringing the
Trade of the World into his Ports ; nor could it with
unquestionable Security be carried any whither else ;
and all these Blessings enjoyed, under a Prince of the
greatest Clemency, and Justice, and of the greatest
Piety, and Devotion, and the most indulgent to his
Subjects, and most solicitous for their Happiness and
Prosperity.

O fortunati nimium, bona si sua normt !
In this blessed Conjuncture, when no other Prince
thought He wanted any Thing, to compass what He
most desired to be possessed of, but the Affection and
Friendship of the King of England. ; a small, scarce
discernable Cloud arose in the North ; which was
shortly after attended with such a Storm, that never
gave over raging, till it had shaken, and even rooted
up the greatest, and tallest Cedars of the three Nations ;
blasted all its Beauty and Fruitfulness ; brought its
Strength to Decay, and its Glory to Reproach, and
almost to Desolation ; by such a Career, and Deluge
of Wickedness, and Rebellion, as by not being enough
foreseen, or, in Truth, suspected, could not be
prevented.

Life, Written by Himself



J57 His 'Tribute to Qromwell

HE was one of those Men, quos vituperate ne inimici
quidem possunt, nisi ut simul laudent ; whom his
very Enemies could not condemn without commending
230



EARL OF CLARENDON



him at the same time : for he could never have done
half that mischief without great part9 of Courage,
Industry, and Judgement. And he must have had a
wonderful understanding in the Natures and Humours
of Men, and as great a dexterity in applying them ;
who, from a private and obscure birth (though of
a good Family) without Interest of Estate, Alliance or
Friendships, could raise himself to such a height, and
compound and knead such opposite and contradictory
tempers, humours, and interests into a consistence,
that contributed to His designs, and to their own
destruction ; whilst himself grew insensibly powerful
enough to cut off those by whom he had climbed, in
the instant that they projected to demolish their own
building. What Velleius Paterculus said of Cinna may
very justly be said of Him, ausum eum, quae nemo auderet
bonus; perfecisse, quae a nullo, nisi fortissimo, ferfici pos-
sent, He attempted those things which no good Man
durst have ventured on ; and achieved those in which
none but a valiant and great Man could have succeeded.
Without doubt, no Man with more wickedness ever
attempted anything, or brought to pass what he desired
more wickedly, more in the face and contempt of
Religion, and moral Honesty ; yet wickedness as great
as his could never have accomplish'd those trophies,
without the assistance of a great Spirit, an admirable
circumspection, and sagacity, and a most magnanimous
resolution.

When he appeared first in the Parliament he seemed
to have a Person in no degree gracious, no ornament
of discourse, none of those Talents which use to re-
concile the Affections of the Standers by : yet as he
grew into Place and Authority, his parts seemed to be
renewed, as if he had concealed Faculties, till he had

231



EDWARD HYDE



occasion to use them ; and when he was to act the
part of a great Man, he did it without any indecency
through the want of Custom.

A History of the Rebellion

158 The Battle of Stamford Hill

ON Tuesday the sixteenth of May, about five of
the Clock in the Morning, they disposed them-
selves to their Work ; having stood in their Armes all
the Night. The Number of the Foot was about two
thousand four hundred, which they divided into four
Parts, and agreed on their several Provinces. The
first was Commanded by the Lord Mohun, and
Sir Ralph Hoptoti ; who undertook to Assault the Camp
on the South side. Next them, on the left hand,
Sir John Berkley, and Sir Bevil Greenvil were to
force their way. Sir Nicholas Slanning, and Colonel
Trevannion were to Assault the North side ; and, on
the left hand, Colonel Thomas Basset, who was Major
General of their Foot, and Colonel William Godolphin
were to advance with Their Party ; each Party having
two pieces of Cannon to dispose as they found necessary:
Colonel John Digby Commanding the Horse and
Dragoons, being about five hundred, and stood upon
a Sandy Common which had a way to the Camp, to
take any advantage he could on the Enemy, if they
Charged ; otherwise, to be firm as a Reserve.

In this manner the Fight begun ; the King's Forces
pressing, with their utmost vigour, those four ways up
the Hill, and the Enemies as obstinately defending
their ground. The Fight continued with very
doubtful success, till towards three of the Clock in the
Afternoon ; when word was brought to the Chief
232



EARL OF CLARENDON

Officers of the Cornish, that their Ammunition was
spent to less than four Barrels of Powder ; which
(concealing the defect from the Soldiers) they resolved
could only be supplied with Courage : and therefore,
by Messengers to one another, they agreed to advance
with their full Bodies, without making any more
shot, till they reached the top of the Hill, and so
might be upon even ground with the Enemy ; wherein
the Officers' Courage, and Resolution, was so well
seconded by the Soldier, that they begun to get
ground in all places ; and the Enemy, in wonder of
the Men, who out faced their shot with their Swords,
to quit their Post. Major General Chudleigh, who
ordered the Battle, failed in no part of a Soldier ; and
when he saw his Men recoile from less Numbers, and
the Enemy in all places gaining the Hill upon him,
himself advanced, with a good stand of Pikes, upon
that Party which was led by Sir John Berkley, and Sir
Bevil Greenvil ; and Charged them so smartly, that
he put them into disorder ; Sir Bevil Greenvil, in the
shock, being borne to the Ground, but quickly
relieved by his Companion ; they so reinforced the
Charge, that having killed most of the Assailants, and
dispersed the rest, they took the Major General
Prisoner, after he had behaved himself with as much
Courage, as a Man could do. Then the Enemy gave
ground apace, insomuch as the four Parties, growing
nearer and nearer as they ascended the Hill, between
three and four of the Clock, they all met together
upon one ground near the top of the Hill ; where
they embraced with unspeakable joy, each congratulat-
ing the others success, and all acknowledging the
wonderful blessing of God ; and being there possessed
of some of the Enemies Cannon, they turned them upon

233



EDWARD HYDE



the Camp, and advanced together to perfect their
Victory. But the Enemy no sooner understood the
loss of their Major General, but their hearts failed
them ; and being so resolutely pressed, and their
ground lost, upon the security and advantage whereof
they wholely depended, some of them threw down
their Armes, and Others fled ; dispersing themselves,
and every Man shifting for himself : Their General,
the Earl of Stamford, giving the example, who (having
stood at a safe distance all the time of the Battle,
environed with all the Horse, which in small Parties,
though it is true their whole Number was not above
six or seven score, might have done great mischief
to the several Parties of Foot, who with so much
difficulty scaled the steep Hill) as soon as he saw the
day lost, and some said sooner, made all imaginable
hast to Exeter, to prepare them for the condition they
were shortly to expect.

A History of the Rebellion

x 59 Character of Lord Falkland

AS he was of a most incomparable gentleness, appli-
XX. cation, and even a demissness and submission to
good, and worthy, and entire Men, so he was naturally
(which could not but be more evident in his Place,
which objected him to another conversation and
intermixture, than his own election had done) ad-
versus malos injucundus ; and was so ill a dissembler
of his dislike and disinclination to ill Men, that it was
not possible for Such not to discern it. There was
once, in the House of Commons, such a declared
acceptation of the good Service an eminent Member
had done to Them, and, as they said, to the whole
234



EARL OF CLARENDON

Kingdom, that it was moved, he being present,
' that the Speaker might, in the name of the whole
House, give him thanks ; and then, that every Member
might, as a testimony of his particular acknowledge-
ment, stir or move his hat towards him ' ; the which
(though not ordered) when very many did, the Lord
Falkland (who believed the Service itself not to be
of that moment, and that an honorable and generous
Person could not have stooped to it for any recom-
pence) instead of moving his hat, stretched both his
Arms out, and clasped his hands together upon the
Crown of his hat, and held it close down to his head ;
that all Men might see how odious that flattery was
to him, and the very approbation of the Person,
though at that time most popular.

When there was any Overture, or hope of Peace,
he would be more erect and vigorous, and exceedingly
sollicitous to press anything which he thought might
promote it ; and sitting amongst his Friends, often,
after a deep silence and frequent sighs, would, with
a shrill and sad accent, ingeminate the word Peace,
Peace ; and would passionately profess, ' that the very
agony of the War, and the view of the calamities
and desolation the Kingdom did, and must endure,
took his sleep from him, and would shortly break his
heart '. This made some think, or pretend to think,
' that he was so much enamoured on Peace, that he
would have been glad, the King should have bought
it at any price which was a most unreasonable
Calumny. As if a Man that was himself the most
punctual and precise in every circumstance that might
reflect upon Conscience or Honour, could have wished
the King to have committed a trespass against either.

A History of the Rebellion
235



JAMES HARRINGTON

1611-1677

160 Oceana

TO speak of the People in each of these Countries,
this of Oceana, for so soft a one, is the most
martial in the whole World. Let States that aim at
Greatness (says Verulamius) take heed how their
Nobility and Gentlemen multiply too fast, for that makes
the common Subject grow to be a Peasant and base Swain
driven out of heart, and in effect but a Gentleman's
Labourer ; just as you may see in Coppice Woods, if
you leave the Staddels too thick, you shall never have
clean Underwood, but Shrubs and Bushes : So in Countries
if the Gentlemen be too many, the Commons will be base ;
and you will bring it to that at last, that not the hundredth
Poll will be fit for a Helmet, specially as to the Infantry,
which is the nerve of an Army, and so there will be great
Population and little Strength. This of which I speak
has been nowhere better seen than by comparing of Oceana
and France, whereof Oceana, though far less in Territory
and Population, has been nevertheless an overmatch, in
regard the middle People of Oceana make good, Soldiers,
which the Peasants in France do not. In which words
Verulamius (as Machiavel has done before him)
harps much upon a string which he has not perfectly
tuned, and that is the balance of Dominion or Property :
as it follows more plainly in his praise of the profound
and admirable device of Panurgus, King of Oceana,
in making Farms and Houses of Husbandry of a Standard ;
that is, maintained with such a proportion of Land to
them, as may breed a Subject to live in convenient plenty,
and no servile condition, and to keep the Plow in the hand
of the owners, and not mere hirelings. And thus indeed
9 Staddels) frees left standing
236



JAMES HARRINGTON



(says he) you shall attain to Virgil's Character which
he gives of ancient Italy :

Terra potens armis atque ubere glebae.

But the Tillage bringing up a good Soldiery, brings
up a good Commonwealth ; which the Author in the
praise of Panurgus did not mind, nor Panurgus in
deserving that praise : for where the owner of the
Plow comes to have the Sword too, he will use it in
defence of his own ; whence it has happened that the
People of Oceana in proportion to their property
have been always free. And the Genius of this
Nation has ever had some resemblance with that of
ancient Italy, which was wholly addicted to Common-
wealths, and where Rome came to make the greatest
account of her rustic Tribes, and to call her Consuls
from the Plow ; for in the way of Parliaments, which
was the Government of this Realm, men of Country-
lives have been still entrusted with the greatest
Affairs, and the People have constantly had an aversion
to the ways of the Court. Ambition loving to be
gay, and to fawn, has been a Gallantry looked upon
as having something in it of the Livery ; and Hus-
bandry, or the country way of Life, though of a grosser
spinning, as the best stuff of a Commonwealth, accord-
ing to Aristotle, such a one being the most obstinate
Assertress of her Liberty, and the least subject to
Innovation or Turbulency. Wherefore till the Foun-
dations (as will be hereafter showed) were removed,
this People was observed to be the least subject
to Shakings and Turbulency of any : Whereas Com-
monwealths, upon which the City Life has had
the stronger influence, as Athens, have seldom or never
been quiet ; but at the best are found to have injured

237



JAMES HARRINGTON



their own business by over-doing it. Whence the
Urban Tribes of Rome, consisting of the Turba
forensis, and Libertins that had received their Freedom
by manumission, were of no reputation in comparison
of the Rustics. It is true, that with Venice it may
seem to be otherwise, in regard the Gentlemen (for
so are all such called as have a right to that Govern-
ment) are wholly addicted to the City Life : but
then the Turba forensis, the Secretaries, Ciitadini,
with the rest of the Populace, are wholly excluded.
Otherwise a Commonwealth, consisting but of one
City, would doubtless be stormy, in regard that
Ambition would be every man's trade : but where it
consists of a Country, the Plow in the hands of the
owner finds him a better calling, and produces the
most innocent and steady Genius of a Commonwealth,
such as is that of Oceana.

Oceana

SIR THOMAS URQUHART

1611-1660

161 Fay ce que Voudras

ALL their life was spent not in lawes, statutes or
_Zx rules, but according to their own free will and
pleasure. They rose out of their beds, when they
thought good : they did eat, drink, labour, sleep,
when they had a minde to it, and were disposed for
it. None did awake them, none did offer to constrain
them to eat, drink, nor to do any other thing ; for so
had Gargantua established it. In all their rule, and
strictest tie of their order, there was but this one
clause to be observed,

DO WHAT THOU WILT.

Because men that are free, well-borne, well-bred,
and conversant in honest companies, have naturally

238



SIR THOMAS URQUHART

an instinct and spurre that prompteth them unto
vertuous actions, and withdraws them from vice,
which is called honour.

Translation of Rabelais, Garganlua and Pantagruel

162 (jargantua to his Son, at Paris
University

BUT although my deceased father of happy memory
Grangousier, had bent his best endeavours to make
me profit in all perfection and Political knowledge,
and that my labour and study was fully correspondent
to, yea, went beyond his desire : neverthelesse, as
thou mayest well understand, the time then was not
so proper and fit for learning as it is at present, neither
had I plenty of good masters such as thou hast had ;
for that time was darksome, obscured with clouds of
ignorance, and savouring a little of the infelicity and
calamity of the Gothes, who, whereever they set
footing, destroyed all good literature, which in my
age hath by the divine goodnesse been restored unto
its former light and dignity, and that with such
amendment and increase of the knowledge, that now
hardly should I be admitted unto the first forme of
the little Grammar-school-boyes : I say, I, who in
my youthful dayes was (and that justly) reputed the
most learned of that age ; which I do not speak in
vain boasting, although I might lawfully do it in writing
unto thee, in verification whereof thou hast the
authority of Marcus Tullius in his book of old age,
and the sentence of Plutarch, in the book intituled,
how a man may praise himself without envie : but
to give thee an emulous encouragement to strive yet
further.



239



SIR THOMAS URQUHART



Now is it that the mindes of men are qualified with
all manner of discipline, and the old sciences revived,
which for many ages were extinct : now it is, that the
learned languages are to their pristine purity restored,
viz. Greek (without which a man may be ashamed to
account himself a scholar) Hebrew, Arabick, Chaldaean
and Latine. Printing likewise is now in use, so
elegant, and so correct, that better cannot be imagined,
although it was found out but in my time by divine
inspiration, as by a diabolical suggestion on the other
side was the invention of Ordnance. All the world
is full of knowing men, of most learned Schoolmasters,
and vast Libraries : and it appears to me as a truth,
that neither inPlato's time, nor Cicero's,norPapinian's,
there was ever such conveniency for studying, as we
see at this day there is : nor must any adventure
henceforward to come in publick, or present himself
in company, that hath not been pretty well polished
in the shop of Minerva : I see robbers, hangmen,
free-booters, tapsters, ostlers, and such like, of the
very rubbish of the people, more learned now, then
the Doctors and Preachers were in my time.

What shall I say? the very women and children
have aspired to this praise and celestial Manna of
good learning.

Translation of Rabelais, Garganiua and Pantagruel

JEREMY TAYLOR, BISHOP OF DOWN
AND CONNOR

1613-1667

163 tAgainst Bitterness of Zeal

A NY Zeal is proper for Religion, but the zeal of the
XX. Sword and the Zeal of Anger-; this is the Bitter-
ness of Zeal, and it is a certain Temptation to every
240



JEREMY TAYLOR

Man against his Duty ; for if the Sword turns Preacher,
and dictates Propositions by Empire instead of Argu-
ments, and engraves them in Men's Hearts with a
Poignard, that it shall be Death to believe what I
innocently and ignorantly am persuaded of, it must
needs be unsafe to try the Spirits, to try all Things, to
make inquiry ; and yet, without this Liberty, no Man
can justify himself before God or Man, nor confidently
say that his Religion is best ; since he cannot without
a final Danger make himself to give a right Sentence,
and to follow that which he finds to be best. This
may ruin Souls by making Hypocrites, or careless and
compliant against Conscience or without it ; but it
does not save Souls, though peradventure it should
force them to a good Opinion. This is Inordinatton
of Zeal ; for Christ, by reproving St. Peter drawing
his Sword even in the Cause of Christ, for his sacred
and yet injured Person, saith Theophylact, ' teaches
us not to use the Sword, though in the cause of God
or for God himself '. . .

When Abraham sat at his Tent Door, according to
his custom, waiting to entertain Strangers, he espied
an old Man, stooping and leaning on his Staff, weary
with Age and Travel, coming towards him, who was
a hundred years of Age. He received him kindly,
washed his Feet, provided Supper, caused him to sit
down ; but observing that the Old man Eat and prayed
not nor begged a Blessing on his Meat, he asked him
why he did not worship the God of Heaven. The old
man told him that he worshipped the Fire only, and
acknowledged no other God. At which answer Abra-
ham grew so zealously angry that he thrust the old
Man out of his Tent, and exposed him to all the Evils
of the Night and an unguarded Condition. When the

241



JEREMY TAYLOR

old Man was gone, God called to Abraham and asked
him where the Stranger was? He replied, I thrust
him away because he did not worship thee. God
answered him, ' I have suffered him these hundred
Years, although he dishonoured me : and couldst not
thou endure him one Night ? '

Sermons

164 Vicistiy Qalilcee !

THAT such a Religion, in such a Time, by the
Sermons and Conduct of Fishermen, Men of
mean breeding and illiberal Arts, should so speedily
triumph over the Philosophy of the^World, and the
Arguments of the Subtle, and the Sermons of the
Eloquent ; the Power of Princes and the Interests of
States, the Inclinations of Nature and the Blindness
of Zeal, the Force of Custom and the Solicitation of
Passions, the Pleasures of Sin and the busy Arts of the
Devil ; that is against Wit and Power, Superstition
and Wilfulness, Fame and Money, Nature and
Empire, which are all the causes in this World that
can make a Thing impossible ; this, this is to be
ascribed to the Power of God, and is the great
Demonstration of the Resurrection of Jesus. Every
thing was an Argument for it, and improved it : no
objection could hinder it, no Enemies destroy it,
whatsoever was for them, it made the Religion to
increase ; whatsoever was against them, made it to
increase ; Sun-shine and Storms, fair Weather or
foul, it was all one as to the event of Things : for
they were Instruments in the Hands of God, who
could make what himself should choose to be the
product of any cause ; so that if the Christians had
Peace, they went abroad and brought in Converts ;
242



BISHOP OF DOWN AND CONNOR



if they had no Peace, but Persecution, the Converts
came in to them. In prosperity they allured and
enticed the World by the Beauty of Holiness ; in
Affliction and Trouble they amazed all Men with the
splendour of their Innocence and the Glories of their
Patience ; and quickly it was that the world became
Disciple to the glorious Nazarene, and men could no
longer doubt of the Resurrection of Jesus, when it
became so demonstrated by the certainty of them
that saw it, and the Courage of them that died for
it, and the Multitude of them that believed it.

Sermon preached at ihe Funeral of the Lord Primate



165 How z/tmiable are Thy Tabernacles

WE have not only felt the Evils of an intestine
War, but God hath smitten us in our Spirit.
But I delight not to observe the Correspondencies of
such sad Accidents. . . I will therefore deny leave to
my own Affections to ease themselves by complaining
of Others ; I shall only crave leave that I may remem-
ber Jerusalem, and call to Mind the Pleasures of the
Temple, the Order of her Services, the Beauty of
her Buildings, the Sweetness of her Songs, the Decency
of her Ministrations, the Assiduity and Economy of
her Priests and Levites, the Daily Sacrifice, and that
Eternal Fire of Devotion that went not out by Day
nor by Night ; these were the Pleasures of our Peace ;
and there is a remanent Felicity in the very Memory
of those spiritual Delights which we then enjoyed
as Antepasts of Heaven, and consignations to an
Immortality of Joys. And it may be so again when
it shall please God, who hath the Hearts of all Princes

243



JEREMY TAYLOR

in his Hand, and turneth them as the Rivers of
Waters ; and when Men will consider the invaluable
Loss that is consequent, and the Danger of Sin that is
appendant, to the destroying such Forms of Discipline
and Devotion in which God was purely worshipped,
and the Church was edified, and the People instructed
to great Degrees of Piety, Knowledge and Devotion.

Polemical Discourses

166 ^Marriage

MARRIAGE is a School and Exercise of Virtue ;
and though Marriage hath Cares, yet the
Single Life hath Desires, which are more troublesome
and more dangerous, and often end in Sin ; while
the Cares are but Instances of Duty, and Exercises of
Piety ; and therefore if Single Life hath more Privacy
of Devotion, yet Marriage hath more Necessities and
more Variety of it, and is an Exercise of more Graces.

Marriage is the proper Scene of Piety and Patience,
of the Duty of Parents and the Charity of Relations ;
here Kindness is spread Abroad, and Love is united
and made firm as a Centre ; Marriage is the Nursery
of Heaven. The Virgin sends Prayers to God ; but
she carries but one soul to him : but the State of
Marriage fills up the Number of the Elect, and hath
in it the Labour of Love, and the Delicacies of
Friendship, the Blessing of Society, and the Union
of Hands and Hearts. It hath in it less of Beauty,
but more of Safety than the Single Life ; it hath more
Care, but less Danger ; it is more Merry, and more Sad ;
is fuller of Sorrows, and fuller of Joys : it lies under
more Burdens, but is supported by all the Strengths
of Love and Charity, and those Burdens are delightful.

Sermons : The Marriage Rtng

244



BISHOP OF DOWN AND CONNOR



i6y The Husband

THERE is nothing can please a Man without
Love ; and if a Man be weary of the Wise dis-
courses of the Apostles, and of the Innocency of an
even and private Fortune, or hates Peace or a Fruitful
Year, he hath reaped Thorns and Thistles from the
choicest Flowers of Paradise : for nothing can sweeten
Felicity itself but Love. No Man can tell but he
that loves his Children how many delicious Accents
makes a Man's Heart dance in the pretty Conversa-
tion of those dear Pledges : their Childishness, their
Stammering, their little Angers, their Innocence, their
Imperfections, their Necessities, are so many Emana-
tions of Joy and Comfort to him that delights in their
Persons and Society ; but he that loves not his Wife
and Children feeds a Lioness at Home, and broods
a Nest of Sorrows ; and Blessing itself cannot make
him happy : so that all the Commandments of God
enjoining a Man to love his Wife are nothing but
so many Necessities and Capacities of Joy. She that
is loved is safe, and he that loves is joyful.

Sermons : The Marriage Ring

ROBERT LEIGHTON, ARCHBISHOP
OF GLASGOW

1611-1684

168 Quia omnis caro ut joenum

THERE is indeed a great deal of seeming difference
betwixt the outward conditions of life amongst
men. Shall the rich and honourable and beautiful
and healthful go in together, under the same name,
with the baser and unhappier part, the poor, wretched
sort of the world, who seem to be born for nothing but

245



ROBERT LEIGHTON



sufferings and miseries ? At least, hath the wise no
advantage beyond the fools ? Is all grass ? Make you
no distinction f No ; all is grass, or, if you will have
some other name, be it so, once this is true, that all
flesh is grass ; and if that glory which shines so much
in your eyes must have a difference, then this is all it
can have — it is but the flower of that same grass ;
somewhat above the common grass in gayness, a little
comelier, and better apparelled than it, but partaker
of its frail and fading nature ; it hath no privilege nor
immunity that way ; yea, of the two, it is the less
durable, and usually shorter lived ; at the best it
decays with it : The grass withereth, and the flower
thereof falleth away.

Commentary on the First Epistle of St. Peter

GEORGE THORNLEY

b. 1614

169 I'he Qrasshopper

WHILE he was muttering this passion, a grass-
hopper that fled from a swallow took sanctuary
in Chloe's bosom. And the pursuer could not take
her, but her wing by reason of her close pursuit slapped
the girl upon the cheek. And she not knowing what
was done cried out, and started from her sleep. But
when she saw the swallow flying near by and Daphnis
laughing at her fear, she began to give it over and rub
her eyes that yet would be sleeping. The grass-
hopper sang out of her bosom, as if her suppliant were
now giving thanks for the protection. Therefore
Chloe again squeaked out ; but Daphnis could not
hold laughing, nor pass the opportunity to put his
246



GEORGE THORNLEY



hand into her bosom and draw forth friend Grass-
hopper, which still did sing even in his hand. When
Chloe saw it she was pleased and kissed it, and took
and put it in her bosom again, and it prattled all the
way.

Translation of Longus, Daphms and Chloe

iyo The Nightingales

IT was now the beginning of spring, the snow
melting, the earth uncovering herself, and the grass
growing green, when the other shepherds drove out
their flocks to pasture, and Chloe and Daphms before
the rest, as being servants to a greater shepherd. And
forthwith they took their course up to the Nymphs
and that cave, and thence to Pan and his pine ; after-
wards to their own oak, where they sat down to look
to their flocks and kiss each other. They sought about
for flowers too to crown the statues of the Gods.
The soft breath of Zephyrus, and the warm Sun, had
but now brought them forth ; but there were then
to be found the violet, the daffodil, the anagall, with
the other primes and dawnings of the spring. And
when they had crowned the statues of the Gods with
them, they made a libation with new milk, Chloe
from the sheep and Daphms from the goats. They
paid too the first-fruits of the pipe, as it were to provoke
and challenge the nightingales with their music and
song. The nightingales answered softly from the
groves, and as if they remembered their long inter-
mitted song, began by little and little to jug and
warble their Tereus and Itys again.

Translation of Longus, Daphms and Chloe

1 8 anagall) pimpernel

247



HENRY MORE

1614-1687

iyi The World-Qomedy

THE Affairs of this World are like a curious, but
intricately contrived Comedy ; and we cannot
judge of the Tendency of what is Past, or acting at
Present, before the Entrance of the last Act, which
shall bring in Righteousness in triumph ; who, though
she hath abided many a Brunt, and has been very
cruelly and despitefully used hitherto in the World,
yet at last, according to our Desires, we shall see the
Knight overcome the Giant. For what is the Reason
we are so much pleased with the reading Romances
and the Fictions of the Poets, but that here, as
Aristotle says, Things are set down as they should be ;
but in the true History hitherto of the World, Things
are recorded indeed as they are, but it is but a Testi-
mony, that they have not been as they should be ?
Wherefore, in the Upshot of all, when we shall see
that come to pass that so mightily pleases us in the
reading the most ingenious Plays and heroick Poems,
that long afflicted Virtue at last comes to the Crown,
the Mouth of all Unbelievers must be for ever stopped.
And for my own Part, I doubt not but that it shall so
come to pass in the Close of the World. But im-
patiently to call for Vengeance upon every Enormity
before that Time, is rudely to overturn the Stage
before the entrance into the fifth Act, out of Ignorance
of the Plot of the Comedy ; and to prevent the
Solemnity of the general Judgement by more paltry
and particular Executions.

Divine Dialogues



248



EDMUND LUDLOW

1617-1692

172 The Lying-in-State of Oliver Cromwell

ONE of the first acts of the new Government was
to order the funeral of the late usurper ; and
the Council having resolved that it should be very
magnificent, the care of it was referred to a Committee
of them, who, sending for Mr. Kinnersly, master of
the Wardrobe, desired him to find out some precedent
by which they might govern themselves in this im-
portant affair. After examination of his books and
papers Mr. Kinnersly, who was suspected to be inclined
to Popery, recommended to them the solemnities used
upon the like occasion for Philip the Second, King of
Spain, who had been represented to be in Purgatory
for about two months. In the like manner was the
body of this great Reformer laid in Somerset-house :
the apartment was hung with black, the daylight was
excluded, and no other but that of wax tapers to be
seen. This scene of Purgatory continued till the first
of November, which being the day preceding that
commonly called All Souls, he was removed into the
great Hall of the said House, and represented in effigy,
standing on a bed of crimson velvet covered with a
gown of the like coloured velvet, a sceptre in his hand,
and a crown on his head. That part of the Hall wherein
the Bed stood was railed in, and the rails and ground
within them covered with crimson velvet. Four or
five hundred candles set in flat shining candlesticks
were so placed round near the roof of the hall that
the light they gave seemed like the rays of the Sun :
by all which he was represented to be now in a state
of glory. This folly and profusion so far provoked the

249



EDMUND LUDLOW



People that they threw dirt in the night on his
Escutcheon, that was placed over the great gate of
Somerset-house. I purposely omit the rest of the
Pageantry, the great number of persons that attended
on the body, the procession to Westminster, the vast
expense in Mourning, the state and magnificence of
the Monument erected for him, with many other
things that I care not to remember.

Memoirs

ABRAHAM COWLEY

1618-1667

173 Of Solitude

THE truth of the matter is, that neither he who is
a Fop in the world, is a fit man to be alone ; nor
he who has set his heart much upon the world, though
he have never so much understanding ; so that
Solitude can be well fitted and set right but upon
a very few persons. They must have enough know-
ledge of the World to see the vanity of it, and enough
Virtue to despise all Vanity ; if the Mind be possessed
with any Lust or Passions a man had better be in
a Fair than in a Wood alone. They may, like petty
Thieves, cheat us perhaps, and pick our pockets in
the midst of company, but like Robbers they use to
strip and bind, or murder us when they catch us alone.
This is but to retreat from Men, and fall into the
hands of Devils. 'Tis like the punishment of Parricides
among the Romans, to be sowed into a Bag with an
Ape, a Dog, and a Serpent. The first work therefore
that a man must do to make himself capable of the
good of Solitude is the very Eradication of all Lusts,
for how is it possible for a Man to enjoy himself while
250



ABRAHAM COWLEY

his Affections are tied to things without Himself?
In the second place, he must learn the Art and get the
Habit of Thinking ; for this, too, no less than well
speaking, depends upon much practice, and Cogitation
is the thing which distinguishes the Solitude of a God
from a wild Beast. Now because the soul of Man is
not by its own Nature or observation furnished with
sufficient Materials to work upon, it is necessary for
it to have continual recourse to Learning and Books
for fresh supplies, so that the solitary Life will grow
indigent, and be ready to starve without them ; but
if once we be throughly engaged in the Love of
Letters, instead of being wearied with the length of
any day we shall only complain of the shortness of our
whole Life.

O vita, stulto longa, sapienti brevis !

O Life, long to the Fool, short to the Wise !

The first Minister of State has not so much business
in public as a wise man has in private ; if the one have
little leisure to be alone, the other has less leisure to
be in company ; the one has but part of the affairs
of one Nation, the other all the works of God and
Nature under his consideration. There is no saying
shocks me so much as that which I hear very often,
That a man does not know how to pass his Time.
'Twould have been but ill-spoken by Methusalem in
the Nine hundred sixty-ninth year of his Life ; so far
it is from us, who have not time enough to attain to
the utmost perfection of any part of any Science, to
have cause to complain that we are forced to be idle
for want of work. But this, you'll say, is work only
for the Learned ; others are not capable either of the
employments or divertisements that arrive from

251



ABRAHAM COWLEY



Letters. I know they are not, and therefore cannot
much recommend Solitude to a man totally illiterate.

Essays

174 Of Himself

AS far as my Memory can return back into my past
JTjl. Life, before I knew, or was capable of guessing
what the world, or glories, or business of it were, the
natural affections of my soul gave me a secret bent of
aversion from them, as some Plants are said to turn
away from others, by an Antipathy imperceptible to
themselves and inscrutable to man's understanding.
Even when I was a very young Boy at School, instead
of running about on Holidays and playing with my
fellows, I was wont to steal from them, and walk into
the fields, either alone with a Book, or with some one
Companion, if I could find any of the same temper.
I was then, too, so much an Enemy to all constraint,
that my Masters could never prevail on me, by any
perswasions or encouragements, to learn without Book
the common rules of Grammar, in which they dis-
pensed with me alone, because they found I made
a shift to do the usual exercise out of my own reading
and observation. That I was then of the same mind
as I am now (which I confess, I wonder at myself) may
appear by the latter end of an Ode, which I made when
I was but thirteen years old, and which was then
printed with many other Verses. . .

You may see by it I was even then acquainted
with the Poets (for the Conclusion is taken out of
Horace) ; and perhaps it was the immature and
immoderate love of them which stamped first, or
rather engraved, these Characters in me. They were
252



ABRAHAM COWLEY

like Letters cut into the Bark of a young Tree, which
with the Tree still grow proportionably. But how
this love came to be produced in me so early is a hard
question. I believe I can tell the particular little
chance that rilled my head first with such Chimes of
Verse, as have never since left ringing there : for
I remember when I began to read, and to take some
pleasure in it, there was wont to he in my Mother's
Parlour (I know not by what accident, for she herself
never in her life read any Book but of Devotion), but
there was wont to lie Spencers Works ; this I happened
to fall upon, and was infinitely delighted with the
Stories of the Knights, and Giants, and Monsters, and
brave Houses, which I found everywhere there
(though my understanding had little to do with all
this), and by degrees with the tinkling of the Rhyme
and Dance of the Numbers, so that I think I had read
him all over before I was twelve years old, and was
thus made a Poet as irremediably as a Child is made
an Eunuch.

Essays

175 Fallentis semita vitae

I LOVE and commend a true good Fame, because
it is the shadow of Virtue ; not that it doeth any
good to the Body which it accompanies, but 'tis an
efficacious shadow, and like that of St. Peter cures
the Diseases of others. The best kind of Glory, no
doubt, is that which is reflected from Honesty, such
as was the Glory of Cato and Aristides, but it was
harmful to them both, and is seldom beneficial to any
man whilst he lives ; what it is to him after his death
I cannot say, because I love not Philosophy merely
notional and conjectural, and no man who has made

253



ABRAHAM COWLEY



the Experiment has been so kind as to come back to
inform us. Upon the whole matter, I account a
person who has a moderate Mind and Fortune, and
lives in the conversation of two or three agreeable
friends, with little commerce in the world besides,
who is esteemed well enough by his few neighbours
that know him, and is truly irreproachable by anybody,
and so after a healthful quiet life, before the great
inconveniences of old age, goes more silently out of it
than he came in (for I would not have him so much as
Cry in the Exit), this Innocent Deceiver of the world,
as Horace calls him, this Muta persona, I take to have
been more happy in his Part than the greatest Actors
that fill the Stage with show and noise, nay, even than
Augustus himself, who asked with his last breath,
Whether he had not played his Farce very well.

Essays

JOHN EVELYN

1620-1706

276 On his T'lan of a Qarden 'Book

Co. Garden, Lond. 28 Jan. [1657-8].

SIR, I return you a thousand acknowledgements
for the papers which you transmitted me, and I
will render you this account of my present under-
taking. The truth is, that which imported me to
discourse on this subject after this sort was the many
defects which I encountered in books and in gardens,
wherein neither words nor cost had been wanting, but
judgement very much ; and though I cannot boast of
my science in this kind, as both unbecoming my years
and my small experience, yet I esteemed it pardonable
at least, if in doing my endeavour to rectify some
254



JOHN EVELYN

mistakes, and advancing so useful and innocent a
divertisement, I made some essay, and cast in my
symbol with the rest. . . . The model, which I perceive
you have seen, will abundantly testify my abhorrency
of those painted and formal projections of our cockney
gardens and plots, which appear like gardens of paste-
board and marchpane, and smell more of paint than
of flowers and verdure : our drift is a noble, princely,
and universal Elysium, capable of all the amenities
that can naturally be introduced into gardens of
pleasure, and such as may stand in competition with
all the august designs and stories of this nature, either
of ancient or modern times ; yet so as to become
useful and significant to the least pretences and
faculties. We will endeavour to show how the air
and genius of gardens operate upon human spirits
towards virtue and sanctity, I mean in a remote,
preparatory, and instrumental working. How caves,
grots, mounts, and irregular ornaments of gardens
do contribute to contemplative and philosophical
enthusiasm ; how elysium, antrum, nemus, paradysus,
bonus, lucus, &c, signify all of them rem sacram et
divinam ; for these expedients do influence the soul
and spirits of man, and prepare them for converse
with good angels ; besides which, they contribute to
the less abstracted pleasures, philosophy natural and
longevity ; and I would have not only the eulogies
and effigy of the ancient and famous garden heroes,
but a society of the paradisi cultores, persons of ancient
simplicity, Paradisean and Hortulan saints, to be
a society of learned and ingenuous men, such as
Dr. Browne, by whom we might hope to redeem the
time that has been lost in pursuing Vulgar Errours
and still propagating them, as so many bold men do

255



JOHN EVELYN

yet presume to do. Were it to be hoped, inter bos
armorum strepitus, and in so general a catalysis of
integrity, interruption of peace and propriety, the
hortulan pleasures, these innocent, pure, and useful
diversions might enjoy the least encouragement,
whilst brutish and ambitious persons seek themselves
in the ruins of our miserable yet dearest country,
quis talia fando — ?

Letter to Sir Thomas Browne

177 (galley-Slaves

WE went to visit the Galleys, being about twenty-
five ; the Captain of the Galley Royal gave us
most courteous entertainment in his cabin, the slaves
in the interim playing both loud and soft music very
rarely. Then he showed us how he commanded their
motions with a nod and his whistle, making them row
out. The spectacle was to me new and strange, to
see so many hundreds of miserably naked persons,
having their heads shaven close and having only high
red bonnets, a pair of coarse canvas drawers, their
whole backs and legs naked, doubly chained about
their middle and legs, in couples, and made fast to
their seats, and all commanded in a trice by an imperi-
ous and cruel seaman. One Turk he much favoured,
who waited on him in his cabin, but with no other
dress than the rest, and a chain locked about his leg
but not coupled. This galley was richly carved and
gilded, and most of the rest were very beautiful. After
bestowing something on the slaves, the captain sent
a band of them to give us music at dinner where we
lodged. I was amazed to contemplate how these
miserable catiffs lie in their galley crowded together,
yet there was hardly one but had some occupation by
456



JOHN EVELYN

which, as leisure and calms permitted, they get some
little money, insomuch as some of them have, after
many years of cruel servitude, been able to purchase
their liberty. Their rising forward and falling back
at their oar is a miserable spectacle, and the noise of
their chains with the roaring of the beaten waters
has something of strange and fearful to one unaccus-
tomed to it. They are ruled and chastised by strokes
on their backs and soles of their feet on the least
disorder, and without the least humanity ; yet are
they cheerful and full of knavery.

Diary

178 The §reat Fire

SEPT. 7. I went this morning on foot from White-
hall as far as London Bridge, through the late
Fleet Street, Ludgate Hill, by St. Paul's, Cheafside,
Exchange, Bishopsgate, Aldersgate, and out to Moor-
fields, thence through Cornhill, &c, with extraordinary
difficulty, clambering over heaps of yet smoking
rubbish, and frequently mistaking where I was. The
ground under my feet so hot, that it even burnt the
soles of my shoes. In the meantime his Majesty got
to the Tower by water, to demolish the houses about
the graff, which being built entirely about it, had they
taken fire and attacked the White Tower where the
magazine of powder lay, would undoubtedly not only
have beaten down and destroyed all the bridge, but
sunk and torn the vessels in the river, and rendered
the demolition beyond all expression for several miles
about the country.

At my return I was infinitely concerned to find that
goodly Church St. Paul's now a sad ruin, and that
22 graff) wharf
2830 K 257



JOHN EVELYN

beautiful portico (for structure comparable to any in
Europe, as not long before repaired by the late King)
now rent in pieces, flakes of vast stone split asunder,
and nothing remaining entire but the inscription in
the architrave, showing by whom it was built, which
had not one letter of it defaced. It was astonishing
to see what immense stones the heat had in a manner
calcined, so that all the ornaments, columns, freizes,
capitals, and projectures of massy Portland stone
flew off, even to the very roof, where a sheet of lead
covering a great space (no less than 6 acres by measure)
was totally melted ; the ruins of the vaulted roof
falling broke into St. Faith's, which being filled with
the magazines of books belonging to the Stationers,
and carried thither for safety, they were all consumed,
burning for a week following. It is also observable
that the lead over the altar at the East end was
untouched, and among the divers monuments, the
body of one Bishop remained entire.

Thus lay in ashes that most venerable Church, one
of the most ancient pieces of early piety in the Christian
world, besides near 100 more. The lead, iron-work,
bells, plate, &c, melted ; the exquisitely wrought
Mercers' Chapel, the sumptuous Exchange, the august
fabric of Christ Church, all the rest of the Companies''
Halls, splendid buildings, arches, entries, all in dust ;
the fountains dried up and ruined, whilst the very
waters remained boiling ; the voragos of subterranean
cellars, wells, and dungeons, formerly warehouses, still
burning in stench and dark clouds of smoke, so that in
five or six miles traversing about, I did not see one load
of timber unconsumed, nor many stones but what were
calcined white as snow. The people who now walked
about the ruins appeared like men in some dismal
*58



JOHN EVELYN

desert, or rather in some great City laid waste by
a cruel enemy ; to which was added the stench that
came from some poor creatures bodies, beds, and
other combustible goods. Sir Tho. Gressham's statue,
though fallen from its nich in the Royal Exchange,
remained entire, when all those of the Kings since the
Conquest were broken to pieces ; also the standard in
Cornhill, and Queen Elizabeth's effigies, with some
arms on Ludgate, continued with but little detriment,
whilst the vast iron chains of the City streets, hinges,
bars and gates of prisons were many of them melted
and reduced to cinders by the vehement heat.

Nor was I yet able to pass through any of the
narrower streets, but kept the widest ; the ground and
air, smoke and fiery vapour, continued so intense that
my hair was almost singed, and my feet unsufferably
surbated. The by-lanes and narrower streets were
quite filled up with rubbish, nor could one have
possibly known where he was, but by the ruins of some
Church or Hall, that had some remarkable tower or
pinnacle remaining. I then went towards Islington
and Higbgate, where one might have seen 200,000
people of all ranks and degrees dispersed and lying
along by their heaps of what they could save from the
fire, deploring their loss, and though ready to perish
for hunger and destitution, yet not asking one penny
for relief, which to me appeared a stranger sight than
any I had yet beheld. His Majesty and Council
indeed took all imaginable care for their relief by
proclamation for the country to come in and refresh
them with provisions.

Diary

17 surbated) made sore



259



LUCY HUTCHINSON

b. 1620

279 <±4 'Puritan Qourtship

HE therefore went to Richmond, where he found
a great deal of good young company, and many
ingenuous persons that, by reason of the court, where
the young princes were bred, entertained themselves
in that place, and had frequent resort to the house
where Mr. Hutchinson tabled. . . In the same house
with him there was a younger daughter of Sir Allen
Apsley, late lieutenant of the Tower, tabled for the
practice of her lute, till the return of her mother,
who was gone into Wiltshire for the accomplishment
of a treaty that had been made some progress in,
about the marriage of her elder daughter with a
gentleman of that country, out of which my lady
herself came, and where her brothers, Sir "John
St. John and Sir Edward Hungerford, living in great
honour and reputation, had invited her to a visit of
them. This gentlewoman, that was left in the house
with Mr. Hutchinson, was a very child, her elder
sister being at that time scarcely past it ; but a child
of such pleasantness and vivacity of spirit, and ingenu-
ity in the quality she practised, that Mr. Hutchinson
took pleasure in hearing her practise, and would fall
in discourse with her. She having the keys of her
mother's house, some half a mile distant, would some-
times ask Mr. Hutchinson, when she went over, to
walk along with her. One day when he was there,
looking upon an odd by-shelf in her sister's closet, he
found a few Latin books ; asking whose they were,
he was told they were her elder sister's ; whereupon,
inquiring more after her, he began first to be sorry
360



LUCY HUTCHINSON

she was gone, before he had seen her, and gone upon
such an account that he was not likely to see her.
Then he grew to love to hear mention of her, and the
other gentlewomen who had been her companions
used to talk much to him of her, telling him how
reserved and studious she was, and other things which
they esteemed no advantage. But it so much inflamed
Mr. Hutchinson's desire of seeing her, that he began
to wonder at himself, that his heart, which had ever
had so much indifferency for the most excellent of
womankind, should have such strong impulses towards
a stranger he never saw ; and certainly it was of the
Lord (though he perceived it not), who had ordained
him, through so many various providences, to be
yoked with her in whom he found so much satisfaction.
There scarcely passed any day but some accident or
some discourse still kept alive his desire of seeing this
gentlewoman ; although the mention of her, for the
most part, was inquiries whether she had yet accom-
plished the marriage that was in treaty. . .

One day, having been invited by one of the ladies of
that neighbourhood to a noble treatment at Ston
Garden, which a courtier, that was her servant, had
made for her and whom she would bring, Mr. Hutchin-
son, Mrs. Apsley, and Mr. Coleman's daughter were of
the party, and having spent the day in several pleasant
divertisements, at evening when they were at supper,
a messenger came to tell Mrs. Apsley her mother was
come. She would immediately have gone, but Mr.
Hutchinson, pretending civility to conduct her home,
made her stay till the supper was ended, of which he
ate no more, now only longing for that sight which
he had with such perplexity expected. This atlengthhe
obtained ; but his heart, being prepossessed with his

261



LUCY HUTCHINSON

own fancy, was not free to discern how little there
was in her to answer so great an expectation. She
was not ugly in a careless riding-habit, she had a
melancholy negligence both of herself and others, as
if she neither affected to please others, nor took notice
of anything before her ; yet, in spite of all her
indifferency, she was surprised with some unusual
liking in her soul when she saw this gentleman, who
had hair, eyes, shape, and countenance enough to
beget love in any one at the first, and these set off
with a graceful and generous mien, which promised
an extraordinary person. He was at that time, and
indeed always very neatly habited, for he wore good
and rich clothes, and had a variety of them, and had
them well suited and every way answerable ; in that
little thing, showing both good judgment and great
generosity, he equally becoming them and they him,
which he wore with such unaffectedness and such
neatness as do not often meet in one.

Although he had but an evening sight of her he had
so long desired, and that at disadvantage enough for
her ; yet the prevailing sympathy of his soul made him
think all his pains well paid, and this first did whet his
desire to a second sight, which he had by accident the
next day, and to his joy found that she was wholly
disengaged from that treaty, which he so much feared
had been accomplished ; he found withal, that though
she was modest, she was accostable, and willing to
entertain his acquaintance. This soon passed into a
mutual friendship between them, and though she
innocently thought nothing of love, yet was she glad
to have acquired such a friend, who had wisdom and
virtue enough to be trusted with her councils, for she
was then much perplexed in mind. Her mother and
262



LUCY HUTCHINSON



friends had a great desire she should marry, and were
displeased that she refused many offers which they
thought advantageous enough ; she was obedient, loth
to displease them, but more herself, in marrying such
as she could find no inclination to. . . Mr. Hutchinson,
on the other side, having been told, and seeing how
she shunned all other men, and how civilly she enter-
tained him, believed that a secret power had wrought
a mutual inclination between them, and daily fre-
quented her mother's house, and had the opportunity
of conversing with her in those pleasant walks, which,
at that sweet season of the spring, invited all the
neighbouring inhabitants to seek their joys ; where,
though they were never alone, yet they had every day
opportunity for converse with each other, which the
rest shared not in, while every one minded their own
delights. . .

He, in the meanwhile, prosecuted his love with so
much discretion, duty, and honour, that at the length,
through many difficulties, he accomplished his design.
I shall pass by all the little amorous relations, which,
if I would take the pains to relate, would make a true
history of a more handsome management of love than
the best romances describe ; but these are to be
forgotten as the vanities of youth, not worthy of
mention among the greater transactions of his life.
There is this only to be recorded, that never was there
a passion more ardent and less idolatrous ; he loved
her better than his life, with inexpressible tenderness
and kindness, had a most high obliging esteem of her,
yet still considered honour, religion, and duty above
her, nor ever suffered the intrusion of such a dotage as
should blind him from marking her imperfections. . .
and thus indeed he soon made her more equal to him

a63



LUCY HUTCHINSON



than he found her ; for she was a very faithful mirror,
reflecting truly, though but dimly, his own glories upon
him, so long as he was present ; but she, that was
nothing before his inspection gave her a fair figure,
when he was removed, was only filled with a dark
mist, and never could again take in any delightful
object, nor return any shining representation. The
greatest excellency she had was the power of appre-
hending and the virtue of loving his ; so as his shadow
she waited on him everywhere, till he was taken into
that region of light which admits of none, and then
she vanished into nothing.

Memoirs of Colonel Hutchinson

HENRY VAUGHAN

1622-1695

180 Finis rerum

WHAT is become now of these great Merchants
of the earth, and where is the fruit of all their
labours under the Sun ? Why, truly they are taken
out of the way as all others, and, they are cut off as the
tops of the eares of corn. Their dwelling is in the dust,
and as for their place here, it lies waste, and is not
known : Nettles and Brambles come up in tt, and the
Owl and the Raven dwell tn it. But if you will visit
them at their long homes, and knock at those desolate
doors, you shall find some remains of them, a heap of
loathsomeness and corruption. O miserable and sad
mutations ! Where is now their pompous and shining
train ? Where are their triumphs, fireworks, and
feasts, with all the ridiculous tumults of a popular,
prodigious pride i Where is their purple and fine linen,
their chains of massie gold, and sparkling ornaments
264



HENRY VAUGHAN



of pearls f Where are their Cooks and Carvers, their
fowlers and fishers \ Where are their curious Uten-
sils, their Cups of Agate, Crystal, and Chma-eartb I
Where are their sumptuous Chambers, where they
enclosed themselves in Cedar, Ivory, and Ebony ?
Where is their Mustek, their soft and delicate dressings,
pleasing motions, and excellency of looks 1 Where are
their rich perfumes, costly Conserves, with their
precious and various store of foreign and domestick
wines ? Where are their sons and their daughters fair
as the flowers, straight as the Palm-trees, and polished
as the corners of the Temple ? O pitiful and astonishing
transformations ! all is gone, all is dust, deformity,
and desolation. Their bones are scattered in the pit,
and instead of well-set hair, there is baldness and
loathsomeness instead of beauty. This is the state of
their bodies, and (O blessed Jesus !) who knows the
State of their souls] The Mount of Olives

ANTHONY ASHLEY COOPER,
EARL OF SHAFTESBURY

1621-1683

181 Qharacter of Henry Hastings

MR. HASTINGS, by his quality, being the son,
brother, and uncle to the Earls of Huntingdon,
and his way of living, had the first place amongst us.
He was peradventure an original in our age, or rather
the copy of our nobility in ancient days in hunting
and not warlike times ; he was low, very strong and
very active, of a reddish flaxen hair, his clothes always
green cloth, and never all worth when new five
pounds. His house was perfectly of the old fashion,
in the midst of a large park well stocked with deer,

265



ANTHONY ASHLEY COOPER



and near the house rabbits to serve his kitchen, many-
fish-ponds, and great store of wood and timber ;
a bowling-green in it, long but narrow, full of high
ridges, it being never levelled since it was ploughed ;
they used round sand bowls, and it had a banqueting-
house like a stand, a large one built in a tree. He kept
all manner of sport-hounds that ran buck, fox, hare,
otter, and badger, and hawks long and short winged ;
he had all sorts of nets for fishing : he had a walk in
the New Forest and the manor of Christ Church.
This last supplied him with red deer, sea and river
fish ; and indeed all his neighbours' grounds and
royalties were free to him, who bestowed all his time
in such sports, but what he borrowed to caress his
neighbours' wives and daughters, there being not a
woman in all his walks of the degree of a yeoman's
wife or under, and under the age of forty, but it was
extremely her fault if he were not intimately acquainted
with her. This made him very popular, always speak-
ing kindly to the husband, brother, or father, who
was to boot very welcome to his house whenever he
came. There he found beef pudding and small beer
in great plenty, a house not so neatly kept as to shame
him or his dirty shoes, the great hall strewed with
marrow bones, full of hawks' perches, hounds, spaniels,
and terriers, the upper sides of the hall hung with
the fox-skins of this and the last year's skinning, here
and there a polecat intermixed, guns and keepers'
and huntsmen's poles in abundance. The parlour
was a large long room, as properly furnished ; on
a great hearth paved with brick lay some terriers and
the choicest hounds and spaniels ; seldom but two of
the great chairs had litters of young cats in them,
which were not to be disturbed, he having always
266



EARL OF SHAFTESBURY



three or four attending him at dinner, and a little
white round stick of fourteen inches long lying by his
trencher, that he might defend such meat as he had
no mind to part with to them. The windows, which
were very large, served for places to lay his arrows,
crossbows, stonebows, and other such like- accoutre-
ments ; the corners of the room full of the best chose
hunting and hawking poles ; an oyster-table at the
lower end, which was of constant use twice a day all
the year round, for he never failed to eat oysters
before dinner and supper through all seasons : the
neighbouring town of Poole supplied him with them.
The upper part of this room had two small tables and
a desk, on the one side of which was a church Bible,
on the other the Book of Martyrs ; on the tables
were hawks' hoods, bells, and such like, two or three
old green hats with their crowns thrust in so as to
hold ten or a dozen eggs, which were of a pheasant
kind of poultry he took much care of and fed himself ;
tables, dice, cards, and boxes were not wanting. In
the hole of the desk were store of tobacco-pipes that
had been used. On one side of this end of the room
was the door of a closet, wherein stood the strong
beer and the wine, which never came thence but in
single glasses, that being the rule of the house exactly
observed, for he never exceeded in drink or permitted
it. On the other side was a door into an old chapel
not used for devotion ; the pulpit, as the safest place,
was never wanting of -a cold chine of beef, pasty of
venison, gammon of bacon, or great apple-pie, with
thick crust extremely baked. His table cost him not
much, though it was very good to eat at, his sports
supplying all but beef and mutton, except Friday,
when he had the best sea-fish as well as other fish he



26 7



ANTHONY ASHLEY COOPER



could get, and was the day that his neighbours of
best quality most visited him. He never wanted
a London pudding, and always sung it in with ' my
part lies therein-a.' He drank a glass of wine or two
at meals, very often syrrup of gilliflower in his sack,
and had always a tun glass without feet stood by him
holding a pint of small beer, which he often stirred
with a great sprig of rosemary. He was well natured,
but soon angry, calling his servants bastard and
cuckoldy knaves, in one of which he often spoke truth
to his own knowledge, and sometimes in both, though
of the same man. He lived to a hundred, never lost
his eyesight, but always writ and read without spec-
tacles, and got to horse without help. Until past
fourscore he rode to the death of a stag as well as any.

Fragment of Autobiography

ALGERNON SIDNEY

1622-1683

182 The Sanction of (government

NO man can be my Judge, unless he be my Superior;
and he cannot be my Superior, who is not so
by my consent, nor to any other purpose than I
consent to. This cannot be the case of a Nation,
which can have no equal within itself. Controversies
may arise with other Nations, the decision of which
may be left to Judges chosen by mutual agreement ;
but this relates not to our question. A Nation, and
most especially one that is powerful, cannot recede
from its own right, as a private man from the know-
ledge of his own weakness and inability to defend him-
self, must come under the protection of a greater
Power than his own. The strength of a Nation is
not in the Magistrate, but the strength of the Magis-
268



ALGERNON SIDNEY



trate is in the Nation. The wisdom, industry, and
valour of a Prince may add to the glory and greatness
of a Nation, but the foundation and substance will
always be in itself. . . . The people therefore cannot
be deprived of their natural rights upon a frivolous
pretence to that which never was and never can be.
They who create Magistracies, and give to them such
name, form, and power as they think fit, do only know,
whether the end for which they were created, be
performed or not. They who give a being to the
power which had none, can only judge whether it be
employed to their welfare, or turned to their ruin.
They do not set up one or a few men, that they
and their posterity may live in splendor and greatness,
but that Justice may be administered, Virtue estab-
lished, and provision made for the publick safety.
No wise man will think this can be done, if those who
set themselves to overthrow the Law, are to be their
own Judges. a Discourse on Government

GEORGE FOX

1624-1690

183 The Qloud

ONE morning, as I was sitting by the fire, a great
cloud came over me, and a temptation beset
me, and I sate still. And it was said, All things come
by nature ; and the Elements and Stars came over
me, so that I was in a moment quite clouded with it ;
but, inasmuch as I sate still and said nothing, the
people of the house perceived nothing. And as I sate
still under it and let it alone, a living hope rose in
me, and a true voice arose in me which cried : There
is a living God who made all things. And immediately
the cloud and temptation vanished away, and the

269



GEORGE FOX



life rose over it all, and my heart was glad, and I
praised the living God. Journal of George Fox

JOHN BUNYAN

1628-1688

184 He Tlays Tip Qat on Sunday

BUT one day, amongst all the Sermons our Parson
made, his Subject was, to treat of the Sabbath-
day, and of the Evil of breaking that, either with
Labour, Sports, or otherwise. (Now I was, notwith-
standing my Religion, one that took much delight in
all manner of Vice, and especially that was the day
that I did solace myself therewith.) Wherefore I fell
in my Conscience under his Sermon, thinking and
believing that he made that Sermon on purpose to
show me my evil doing. And at that time I felt what
guilt was, though never before, that I can remember.
But then I was, for the present, greatly loaden there-
with, and so went home when the Sermon was ended,
with a great burden upon my Spirit.

This, for that instant, did benumb the Sinews of my
best Delights, and did embitter my former Pleasures
to me. But behold, it lasted not, for before I had well
dined, the Trouble began to go off my Mind, and my
Heart returned to its old Course. But oh ! How glad
was I, that this Trouble was gone from me, and that
the Fire was put out, that I might sin again without
control ! Wherefore, when I had satisfied Nature
with my Food, I shook the Sermon out of my Mind,
and to my old Custom of Sports and Gaming I
returned with great Delight.

But the same day, as I was in the midst of a game at
Cat, and having struck it one blow from the Hole,
370



JOHN BUNYAN

just as I was about to strike it the second time, a Voice
did suddenly dart from Heaven into my Soul, which
said, Wilt thou leave thy sins and go to Heaven, or have
thy sins and go to Hell ? At this I was put to an
exceeding Maze. Wherefore, leaving my Cat upon
the ground, I looked up to Heaven, and was as if I
had, with the Eyes of my understanding, seen the Lord
Jesus looking down upon me, as being very hotly
displeased with me, and as if he did severely threaten
me with some grievous Punishment for these and other
my ungodly Practices.

I had no sooner thus conceived in my Mind, but
suddenly this conclusion was fastened on my Spirit
(for the former hint did set my sins again before my
Face), That I had been a great and grievous sinner, and
that it was now too late for me to look after Heaven ;
for Christ would not forgive me, nor pardon my Trans-
gressions. Then I fell to musing upon this also. And
while I was thinking on it and fearing lest it should be
so, I felt my Heart sink in Despair, concluding it was
too late ; and therefore I resolved in my Mind I would
go on in sin. For, thought I, if the Case be thus, my
State is surely miserable. Miserable if I leave my Sins,
and but miserable if I follow them. I can but be
damned, and if I must be so, I had as good be damned
for many sins as be damned for few.

Thus I stood in the midst of my Play, before all that
then were present ; but yet I told them nothing. But
I say, I having made this conclusion, I returned
desperately to my sport again ; and I well remember,
that presently this kind of Despair did so possess my
Soul, that I was pers waded, I could never attain to other
Comfort than what I should get in sin ; for Heaven
was gone already, so that on that I must not think.

Grace Abounding
271



JOHN BUNYAN



185 Christian and Faithful come to
Vanity Fair

THEN I saw in my Dream, that when they were
got out of the Wilderness, they presently saw
a Town before them, and the name of that Town is
V anity • and at the Town there is a Fair kept, called
V anity -Fair. It is kept all the Year long : it beareth
the name of Vanity-Fair, because the Town where
it is kept, is lighter than Vanity ; and also, because all
that is there sold, or that cometh thither, is Vanity.
As is the saying of the wise, All that cometh is Vanity.

This Fair is no new erected business, but a thing
of ancient standing ; I will show you the original of it.

Almost five thousand years agone, there were
Pilgrims walking to the Celestial City, as these two
honest persons are ; and Beelzebub, Apollyon, and
Legion, with their Companions, perceiving by the
Path that the Pilgrims made, that their way to the
City lay through this Town of Vanity, they contrived
here to set up a Fair ; a Fair wherein should be sold
of all sorts of Vanity, and that it should last all the
year long. Therefore at this Fair are all such Mer-
chandize sold, as Houses, Lands, Trades, Places,
Honours, Preferments, Titles, Countries, Kingdoms,
Lusts, Pleasures, and Delights of all sorts, as Whores,
Bawds, Wives, Husbands, Children, Masters, Servants,
Lives, Blood, Bodies, Souls, Silver, Gold, Pearls,
Precious Stones, and what not.

And moreover, at this Fair there is at all times to
be seen Jugglings, Cheats, Games, Plays, Fools, Apes,
Knaves, and Rogues, and that of every kind.

Here are to be seen too, and that for nothing,
372



JOHN BUNYAN

Thefts, Murders, Adulteries, False-swearers, and that
of a blood-red colour.

And as in other Fairs of less moment, there are the
several Rows and Streets, under their proper names,
where such and such Wares are vended : So here
likewise, you have the proper Places, Rows, Streets
(viz. Countrys and Kingdoms), where the Wares of
this Fair are soonest to be found : Here is the Britain
Row, the French Row, the Italian Row, the Spanish
Row, the German Row, where several sorts of Vanities
are to be sold. But as in other Fairs, some one Com-
modity is as the chief of all the Fair, so the Ware of
Rome and her Merchandize is greatly promoted in
this Fair : Only our English Nation, with some others,
have taken a dislike thereat.

Now, as I said, the way to the Celestial City lies
just through this Town, where this lusty Fair is kept ;
and he that will go to the City, and yet not go through
this Town, must needs go out of the World. The
Prince of Princes himself, when here, went through
this Town to his own Country, and that upon a Fair-
day too : Yea, and as I think, it was Beelzebub, the
chief Lord of this Fair, that invited him to buy of his
Vanities ; yea, would have made him Lord of the
Fair, would he but have done him Reverence as he went
through the Town. Yea, because he was such a person
of Honour, Beelzebub had him from Street to Street,
and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World in
a little time, that he might, if possible, allure that
Blessed One, to cheapen and buy some of his V anities.
But he had no mind to the Merchandize, and therefore
left the Town, without laying out so much as one
Farthing upon these V anities. This Fair therefore is an
ancient thing, of long standing, and a very great Fair.

273



JOHN BUNYAN

Now these Pilgrims, as I said, must needs go through
this Fair. Well, so they did; but behold, even as
they entered into the Fair, all the people in the Fair
were moved, and the Town itself as it were in a Hubbub
about them ; and that for several reasons : For,

First, The Pilgrims were cloathed with such kind of
Raiment as was diverse from the Raiment of any that
Traded in that Fair. The people therefore of the Fair
made a great gazing upon them. Some said they were
Fools, some they were Bedlams, and some they are
Outlandish-men.

Secondly, And as they wondered at their Apparel, so
they did likewise at their Speech, for few could under-
stand what they said ; they naturally spoke the Lan-
guage of Canaan, but they that kept the Fair, were the
men of this World : so that from one end of the Fair
to the other, they seemed Barbarians each to the other.

Thirdly, But that which did not a little amuse the
Merchandizers, was, that these Pilgrims set very light
by all their Wares.

The Pilgrim's Progress

186 The Valley of Humiliation

BUT we will come again to this Valley of Humiliation.
1 It is the best, and most fruitful piece of Ground
in all those parts. It is fat Ground, and as you see
consisteth much in Meadows ; and if a Man was to
come here in the Summer-time as we do now, if he
knew not anything before thereof, and if he also de-
lighted himself in the sight of his Eyes, he might see
that that would be delightful to him. Behold, how
green this Valley is, also how beautified with Lilies.
I have also known many labouring men that have got
274



JOHN BUNYAN

good Estates in this Valley of Humiliation. (For God
resisteth the Proud ; but gives more, more Grace to
the Humble) for indeed it is a very fruitful Soil, and
doth bring forth by handfuls. Some also have wished
that the next way to their Father's House were here,
that they might be troubled no more with either Hills
or Mountains to go over ; but the way is the way,
and there 's an end.

Now as they were going along and talking, they
espied a Boy feeding his Father's Sheep. The Boy
was in very mean Cloathes, but of a very fresh and well-
favoured Countenance, and as he sat by himself he
sung. Hark, said Mr. Greatheart, to what the Shep-
herd's Boy saith. So they hearkened, and he said,

He that is down, needs fear no fall,
He that is low, no Pride:
He that is humble, ever shall
Have God to be his Guide.

I am content with what I have,
Little be it, or much:
And, Lord, contentment still I crave,
Because thou savest such.

Fullness to such a burden is
That go on Pilgrimage:
Here little, and hereafter Bliss,
Is best from Age to Age.

Then said the Guide, Do you hear him? I will
dare to say, that this Boy lives a merrier Life, and wears
more of that Herb called Hearts-ease in his Bosom, than
he that is clad in Silk and Velvet ; but we will proceed
in our Discourse.

The Pilgrim's Progress



2 75



JOHN BUNYAN



i8y £Mr. Valiant-j or- truth Crosses the
Ifyver

AFTER this, it was noised abroad that Mr. Valiant-
J~\ for-trutb was taken with a Summons, by the same
Post as the other, and had this for a Token that the
Summons was true, That his Pitcher was broken at
the Fountain. When he understood it, he called for
his Friends, and told them of it. Then said he, I am
going to my Fathers, and though with great difficulty
I am got hither, yet now I do not repent me of all
the Trouble I have been at to arrive where I am s
My Sword, I give to him that shall succeed me in my
Pilgrimage, and my Courage and Skill, to him that
can get it. My Marks and Scars I carry with me, to
be a Witness for me, that I have fought his Battles who
now will be my Rewarder. When the Day that he
must go hence, was come, many accompanied him
to the River side, into which, as he went, he said,
Death, where is thy Sting ? And as he went down
deeper, he said, Grave, where is thy Victory ? So he
passed over, and the Trumpets sounded for him on
the other side.

The Pilgrim's Prepress



SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE

1628-1699

188 Of Toetry

WHETHER it be that the Fierceness of the
Gothick Humors, or Noise of their perpetual
Wars, frighted it away, or that the unequal mixture
of the modern Languages would not bear it, certain
it is, that the great Heighths and Excellency both of
276



SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE

Poetry and Musick fell with the Roman Learning and
Empire, and have never since recovered the Admira-
tion and Applauses that before attended them. Yet
such as they are amongst us, they must be confessed
to be the softest and sweetest, the most general and
most innocent Amusements of common Time and
Life. They still find Room in the Courts of Princes
and the Cottages of Shepherds. They serve to revive
and animate the dead Calm of poor or idle Lives,
and to allay or divert the violent Passions and
Perturbations of the greatest and the busiest Men.
And both these Effects are of equal use to Humane
Life ; for the Mind of Man is like the Sea, which is
neither agreeable to the Beholder nor the Voyager
in a Calm or in a Storm, but is so to both when a
little agitated by gentle Gales ; and so the Mind,
when moved by soft and easy Passions or Affections.
I know very well that many, who pretend to be Wise
by the Forms of being Grave, are apt to despise both
Poetry and Musick as Toys and Trifles too light for
the Use or Entertainment of serious Men. But who-
ever find themselves wholly insensible to these Charms
would, I think, do well to keep their own Counsel, for
fear of reproaching their own Temper, and bringing
the Goodness of their Natures, if not of their Under-
standings, into Question. It may be thought at least
an ill Sign, if not an ill Constitution, since some of the
Fathers went so far as to esteem the Love of Musick
a Sign of Predestination, as a thing Divine, and
reserved for the Felicities of Heaven itself. While
this World lasts, I doubt not but the Pleasure and
Request of these two Entertainments will do so too ;
and happy those that content themselves with these
or any other so easy and so innocent, and do not

277



SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE



trouble the World or other Men, because they cannot
be quiet themselves, though no Body hurts them !

When all is done, Human Life is, at the greatest
and the best, but like a froward Child, that must be
played with and humoured a little to keep it quiet till
it falls asleep, and then the Care is over.

Essays

i8g On his ^Retirement from T'ublic Life

FOR the Ease of my own Life, if I know myself, it
will be infinitely more in the retired, than it has
been in the busy Scene : for no good Man can, with
any Satisfaction, take part in the Divisions of his
Country that knows and considers, as I do, what they
have cost Athens, Rome, Constantinople, Florence, Ger-
many, France, and England : nor can the wisest Man
foresee how ours will end, or what they are like to
cost the rest of Christendom as well as ourselves. I
never had but two aims in publick Affairs ; one, to see
the King great as he may be by the Hearts of his
People, without which I know not how he can be great
by the Constitutions of this Kingdom : The other,
in case our Factions must last, yet to see a Revenue
established for the constant maintaining a Fleet of
fifty men of War, at Sea or in Harbour, and the
Seamen in constant Pay ; which would be at least our
Safety from abroad, and make the Crown still con-
sidered in any foreign Alliances, whether the King and
his Parliaments should agree or not in undertaking
any great or National War. And such an Establish-
ment I was in Hopes the last Parliament at West-
minster might have agreed in with the King, by adding
so much of a new Fund to Three Hundred Thousand
* 7 8



SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE



Pounds a Year out of the present Customs. But these
have both failed, and I am content to have failed with
them.

Memoirs

190 On Qardens

IN every Garden four things are necessary to be
provided for, Flowers, Fruit, Shade, and Water ;
and whoever lays out a Garden without all these,
must not pretend it in any Perfection. It ought to
lie to the best Parts of the House, or to those of the
Master's commonest use, so as to be but like one of
the Rooms out of which you step into another. The
part of your Garden next your House (besides the
Walks that go round it), should be a Parterre for
Flowers, or Grass-plots bordered with Flowers ; or
if, according to the newest Mode, it be cast all into
Grass-plots and Gravel Walks, the dryness of these
should be relieved with Fountains, and the plainness
of those with Statues ; otherwise, if large, they have
an ill effect upon the Eye. However, the part next
the House should be open, and no other Fruit but
upon the Walls. If this take up one half of the Garden,
the other should be Fruit-trees, unless some Grove
for shade lie in the middle. If it take up a third part
only, then the next third may be Dwarf-trees, and
the last Standard-fruit ; or else the second part
Fruit-trees, and the third all sorts of Winter-Greens,
which provide for all Seasons of the Year. . .

The best Figure of a Garden is either a Square or
an Oblong, and either upon a Flat or a Descent ; they
have all their Beauties, but the best I esteem an Oblong
upon a Descent. The Beauty, the Air, the View

279



SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE



makes amends for the Expense, which is very great
in finishing and supporting the Terrace-walks, in
levelling the Parterres, and in the Stone-stairs that
are necessary from one to the other.

Upon the Gardens of Epicurus



CHARLES COTTON

1630-1687

igi The Fishing-house

PISCATOR. Good morrow, Sir : what ! up and
dressed, so early ?
Viator. Yes, Sir, I have been dressed this half-
hour : for I rested so well, and have so great a mind
either to take, or to see a Trout taken in your fine
River, that I could no longer lie a-bed.

Piscator. I am glad to see you so brisk this morning,
and so eager of sport : though I must tell you this day
proves so calm, and the Sun rises so bright, as promises
no great success to the Angler : but, however, we'll
try, and, one way or other, we shall, sure, do something.
What will you have to your breakfast, or what will
you drink this Morning ?

Viator. For Breakfast I never eat any, and for
Drink am very indifferent ; but if you please to call
for a glass of Ale, I'm for you ; and let it be quickly
if you please, for I long to see the little Fishing-house
you spoke of, and to be at my lesson.

Piscator. Well, Sir, you see the Ale is come without
calling : for though I do not know yours, my people
know my diet, which is always one Glass so soon as I
am dressed, and no more till Dinner : and so my
Servants have served you.
280



CHARLES COTTON

Viator. My thanks. And now, if you please, let
us look out this fine morning.

Piscator. With all my heart. Boy, take the Key
of my Fishing-house, and carry down those two angle-
Rods in the Hall window, thither, with my Fish-pa n-
nier, Pouch, and Landing-net ; and stay you there till
we come. Come, Sir, we'll walk after, where, by the
way, I expect you should raise all the exceptions
against our Country you can.

V tator. Nay, Sir, do not think me so ill-natured,
nor so uncivil : I only made a little bold with it last
night to divert you, and was only in jest.

[Piscator.] You were then in as good earnest as
I am now with you : but had you been really angry
at it, I could not blame you ; for, to say the truth, it
is not very taking at first sight. But look you, Sir, now
you are abroad, does not the sun shine as bright here
as in Essex, Middlesex, or Kent, or any of your southern
countries ?

Viator. 'Tis a delicate Morning indeed, and I now
think this a marvellous pretty place.

Piscator. Whether you think so or no, you cannot
oblige me more than to say so : and those of my
friends who know my humour, and are so kind as to
comply with it, usually flatter me that way. But look
you, Sir, now you are at the brink of the Hill, how
do you like my River, the Vale it winds through
like a snake, and the situation of my little Fishing-
house ?

Viator. Trust me, 'tis all very fine ; and the house
seems, at this distance, a neat building.

Piscator. Good enough for that purpose. And
here is a bowling Green too, close by it ; so, though
I am myself no very good bowler, I am not totally

281



CHARLES COTTON

devoted to my own pleasure, but that I have also
some regard to other men's. And now, Sir, you are
come to the door ; pray walk in, and there we will
sit, and talk as long as you please.

Viator. Stay, what 's here over the door ? Pis-
catoribus Sacrum. Why then, I perceive I have
some Title here ; for I am one of them, though one
of the worst. And here, below it, is the Cipher too
you spoke of ; and 'tis prettily contrived. Has my
master Walton ever been here to see it ; for it seems
new built ?

Piscator. Yes, he saw it cut in the stone before it
was set up ; but never in the posture it now stands :
for the house was but building when he was last here,
and not raised so high as the Arch of the door. And
I am afraid he will not see it yet : for he has lately writ
me word, he doubts his coming down this Summer ;
which, I do assure you, was the worst news he could
possibly have sent me.

Viator. Men must sometimes mind their affairs
to make more room for their pleasures. And 'tis odds
he is as much displeased with the business that keeps
him from you, as you are that he comes not. But
I am the most pleased with this little house of anything
I ever saw : it stands in a kind of Peninsula too, with
a delicate clear River about it. I dare hardly go in,
lest I should not like it so well within as without :
but by your leave, I'll try. Why, this is better and
better, fine lights, finely wainscoted, and all exceeding
neat, with a Marble Table and all in the middle !

Piscator. Enough, Sir, enough, I have laid open
to you the part where I can worst defend myself, and
now you attack me there. Come, Boy, set two Chairs ;
and whilst I am taking a Pipe of Tobacco, which is
283



CHARLES COTTON



always my Breakfast, we will, if you please, talk of
some other Subject.

Viator. None fitter, then, Sir, for the time and
place, than those instructions you promised.

The Compleat Angler, Part 11

JOHN TILLOTSON, ARCHBISHOP
OF CANTERBURY

1630-1694

ig2 Of Feasts

ONE would be apt to wonder, that Nebemiah
(Chap, v, Verses 16, 17, 18) should reckon a huge
bill of fare, and a vast number of promiscuous guests
amongst his virtues and good deeds, for which he
desires God to remember him. But, upon better
consideration, besides the bounty, and sometimes
charity, of a great table (provided there be nothing of
vanity or ostentation in it) there may be exercised
two very considerable virtues ; one is temperance,
and the other self-denial, in a man's being contented,
for the sake of the public, to deny himself so much, as
to sit down every day to a feast, and to eat continually
in a crowd, and almost never to be alone, especially
when, as it often happens, a great part of the company
that a man must have is the company that a man would
not have. I doubt it will prove but a melancholy
business, when a man comes to die, to have made
a great noise and bustle in the world, and to have
been known far and near, but all this while to have
been hid and concealed from himself. It is a very odd
and fantastical sort of life for a man to be continually
from home, and most of all a stranger at his own house.
It is surely an uneasy thing, to sit always in a frame,

28.?



JOHN TILLOTSON

and to be perpetually upon a man's guard ; not to be
able to speak a careless word, or to use a negligent
posture, without observation and censure.

Men are apt to think, that they, who are in highest
places, and have the most power, have most liberty
to say and do what they please. But it is quite other-
wise ; for they have the least liberty, because they are
most observed. It is not mine own observation ;
a much wiser man (I mean Tully) says, In maxima
quaque fortuna minimum licere. They, that are in the
highest and greatest condition, have of all others the
least liberty.

Reflections

JOHN DRYDEN

1631-1700

193 June 3rd, 1665

IT was that memorable day, in the first summer of
the late War, when our Navy engaged the Dutch ;
a day wherein the two most mighty and best-appointed
Fleets which any age had ever seen, disputed the com-
mand of the greater half of the Globe, the commerce
of nations, and the riches of the Universe. While these
vast floating bodies, on either side, moved against each
other in parallel lines, and our Countrymen, under the
happy conduct of his Royal Highness, went breaking,
by little and little, into the line of the Enemies ; the
noise of the Cannon from both Navies reached our
ears about the City, so that all men being alarmed with
it, and in a dreadful suspense of the event which we
knew was then deciding, every one went following the
sound as his fancy led him ; and leaving the Town
almost empty, some took towards the Park, some cross
284



JOHN DRYDEN

the River, others down it ; all seeking the noise in the
depth of silence.

Among the rest it was the fortune of Etigenius,
Crites, Lisideius, and Neander, to be in company
together ; three of them persons whom their wit and
Quality have made known to all the Town ; and whom
I have chose to hide under these borrowed names
that they may not suffer by so ill a relation as I am
going to make of their discourse.

Taking then a Barge which a servant of Lisideius
had provided for them, they made haste to shoot the
Bridge, and left behind them that great fall of waters
which hindered them from hearing what they desired :
after which, having disengaged themselves from many
Vessels which rode at anchor in the Thames and almost
blocked up the passage towards Greenwich, they
ordered the Watermen to let fall their oars more gently;
and then, every one favouring his own curiosity with
a strict silence, it was not long ere they perceived the
Air break about them like the noise of distant Thunder,
or of swallows in a Chimney : those little undulations
of sound, though almost vanishing before they reached
them, yet still seeming to retain somewhat of their
first horror which they had betwixt the Fleets. After
they had attentively listened till such time as the
sound by little and little went from them, Eugemus,
lifting up his head, and taking notice of it, was the first
who congratulated to the rest that happy Omen of
our Nation's Victory : adding, we had but this to
desire in confirmation of it, that we might hear no
more of that noise which was now leaving the English
Coast.

Essay of Dramatic Poesy
2B5



JOHN DRYDEN



ig4 Shakespeare and 'Ben Jonson

TO begin, then, with Shakespeare. He was the
man who of all Modern, and perhaps Ancient
Poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul.
All the Images of Nature were still present to him, and
he drew them, not laboriously, but luckily ; when he
describes anything you more than see it, you feel it
too. Those who accuse him to have wanted learning
give him the greater commendation : he was naturally
learned ; he needed not the spectacles of Books to
read Nature ; he looked inwards, and found her there.
I cannot say he is everywhere alike ; were he so,
I should do him injury to compare him with the
greatest of Mankind. He is many times flat, insipid ;
his Comick wit degenerating into clenches, his serious
swelling into Bombast. But he is always great when
some great occasion is presented to him ; no man can
say he ever had a fit subject for his wit and did not
then raise himself as high above the rest of poets,

Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi.

The consideration of this made Mr. Hales of Eaton
say, that there was no subject of which any poet ever
writ but he would produce it much better treated of
in Shakespeare ; and however others are now generally
preferred before him, yet the age wherein he lived,
which had contemporaries with him Fletcher and
Johnson, never equalled them to him in their esteem :
and in the last King's court, when Ben's reputation
was at highest, Sir John Suckling, and with him the
greater part of the Courtiers, set our Shakespeare far
above him. . .

As for Johnson, to whose Character I am now arrived,
286



JOHN DRYDEN

if we look upon him while he was himself (for his last
Plays were but his dotages), I think him the most
learned and judicious Writer which any Theatre ever
had. He was a most severe Judge of himself, as well
as others. One cannot say he wanted wit, but rather
that he was frugal of it. In his works you find little to
retrench or alter. Wit and Language and Humour
also in some measure, we had before him ; but some-
thing of Art was wanting to the Drama till he came.
He managed his strength to more advantage than any
who preceded him. You seldom find him making Love
in any of his Scenes, or Endeavouring to move the
Passions ; his genius was too sullen and saturnine to do
it gracefully, especially when he knew he came after
those who had performed both to such an height.
Humour was his proper Sphere ; and in that he
delighted most to represent Mechanick people. He
was deeply conversant in the Ancients, both Greek and
Latin, and he borrowed boldly from them : there is
scarce a Poet or Historian among the Roman Authors
of those times whom he has not translated in Sejanus
and Catiline. But he has done his Robberies so openly
that one may see he fears not to be taxed by any Law.
He invades Authors like a Monarch ; and what would
be theft in other Poets is only victory in him. With
the spoils of these Writers he so represents old Rome
to us, in its Rites, Ceremonies, and Customs, that if one
of their Poets had written either of his Tragedies we
had seen less of it than in him. If there was any fault
in his Language 'twas that he weaved it too closely and
laboriously in his serious Plays : perhaps, too, he did
a little too much Romanize our Tongue, leaving the
words which he translated almost as much Latin as he
found them : wherein, though he learnedly followed

287



JOHN DRYDEN



the Idiom of their language, he did not enough comply
with ours. If I would compare him with Shakespeare,
I must acknowledge him the more correct poet, but
Shakespeare the greater wit. Shakespeare was the
Homer, or father of our Dramatick Poets ; Johnson
was the Virgil, the pattern of elaborate writing ;
I admire him, but I love Shakespeare.

Essay of Dramatic Poesy

ig5 Qhaucer

HE must have been a Man of a most wonderful
comprehensive Nature, because, as it has been
truly observed of him, he has taken into the compass
of his Canterbury Tales the various Manners and
Humours (as we now call them) of the whole English
Nation, in his Age. Not a single Character has escaped
him. All his Pilgrims are severally distinguished from
each other ; and not only in their inclinations, but in
their very physiognomies and persons. Baptista Porta
could not have described their natures better than by
the marks which the Poet gives them. The Matter
and Manner of their Tales, and of»their Telling, are so
suited to their different Educations, Humours, and
Callings, that each of them would be improper in any
other mouth. Even the grave and serious Characters
are distinguished by their several sorts of Gravity :
their Discourses are such as belong to their Age, their
Calling, and their Breeding ; such as are becoming of
them, and of them only. Some of his Persons are
Vicious, and some Vertuous ; some are unlearned, or
(as Chaucer calls them) lewd, and some are learned.
Even the ribaldry of the Low Characters is different :
the Reeve, the Miller, and the Cook, axe several men,
288



JOHN DRYDEN

and distinguished from each other as much as the
mincing Lady-Prioress and the broad-speaking, gap-
toothed Wife of Bath. But enough of this ; there is
such a variety of Game springing up before me, that
I am distracted in my Choice, and know not which to
follow. 'Tis sufficient to say, according to the Proverb,
that here is God's plenty.

Preface to the Fables

196 Dryden Qrown Old

I HAVE added some Original Papers of my own,
which whether they are equal or inferior to my
other Poems, an Author is the most improper Judge ;
and therefore I leave them wholly to the Mercy of
the Reader. I will hope the best, that they will not
be condemned ; but if they should, I have the Excuse
of an old Gentleman, who, mounting on Horseback
before some Ladies, when I was present, got up
somewhat heavily, but desired of the Fair Spectators
that they would count Fourscore and eight before
they judged him. By the Mercy of God, I am already
come within Twenty Years of his Number, a Cripple
in my Limbs ; but what Decays are in my Mind, the
Reader must determine. I think my self as vigorous
as ever in the Faculties of my Soui, excepting only
my Memory, which is not impaired to any great
degree ; and if I lose not more of it, I have no great
reason to complain. What Judgment I had, increases
rather than diminishes ; and Thoughts, such as they
are, come crowding in so fast upon me, that my only
Difficulty is to chuse or to reject ; to run them into
Verse or to give them the other harmony of Prose :
I have so long studied and practised both, that they

2830 L 289



JOHN DRYDEN



are grown into a Habit, and become familiar to me.
In short, though I may lawfully plead some part of
the old Gentleman's Excuse, yet I will reserve it till
I think I have greater need, and ask no Grains of
Allowance for the Faults of this my present Work,
but those which are given of course to Humane
Frailtv.

Preface to the Fables



JOHN LOCKE

1632-1704

197 On the Teaching of English

TO write and speak correctly gives a Grace, and
gains a favourable attention to what one has to
say ; and, since it is English that an English Gentleman
will have constant use of, that is the Language he
should chiefly cultivate, and wherein most care should
be taken to polish and perfect his Style. To speak or
write better Latin than English may make a man be
talked of ; but he would find it more to his purpose
to express himself well in his own tongue, that he uses
every moment, than to have the vain commendation
of others for a very insignificant quality. This I find
universally neglected, and no care taken anywhere
to improve Young Men in their own Language, that
they may thoroughly understand and be Masters of it.
If any one among us have a facility or purity more than
ordinary in his Mother Tongue, it is owing to Chance,
or his Genius, or anything, rather than to his Educa-
tion, or any care of his Teacher. To mind what
English his Pupil speaks or writes is below the dignity
of one bred up amongst Greek and Latin, though he
have but little of them himself. These are the
290



JOHN LOCKE

learned Languages, fit only for learned Men to meddle
with and teach ; English is the language of the illiterate
Vulgar, though yet we see the policy of some of our
neighbours hath not thought it beneath the public care
to promote and reward the improvement of their own
Language. Polishing and enriching their Tongue is no
small Business amongst them : it hath colleges and
stipends appointed it, and there is raised amongst them
a great Ambition and Emulation of writing correctly ;
and we see what they are come to by it, and how far
they have spread one of the worst Languages, possibly,
in this part of the World ; if we look upon it as it was
in some few Reigns backwards, whatever it be now.
The great Men amongst the Romans were daily
exercising themselves in their own language ; and we
find yet upon record the Names of Orators who taught
some of their emperors Latin, though it were their
Mother Tongue.

It is plain the Greeks were yet more nice in theirs ;
all other Speech was barbarous to them but their own,
and no Foreign Language appears to have been studied
or valued amongst that learned and acute People ;
though it be past doubt, that they borrowed their
Learning and Philosophy from abroad.

I am not here speaking against Greek and Latin ;
I think they ought to be studied, and the Latin, at
least, understood well, by every Gentleman. But
whatever foreign Languages a Young Man meddles
with (and the more he knows the better), that which
he should ciitically study and labour to get a facility,
clearness, and elegancy to express himself in, should
be his own, and to this purpose he should daily be
exercised in it.

Some Thoughts concerning Education
291



SAMUEL PEPYS

1633-1703

198 <t4 "Jaunt into the Country

JULY 14, 1667. (Lord's day.) Up, and my wife,
a little before four, and to make us ready ; and by
and by Mrs. Turner come to us by agreement, and
she and I stayed talking below while my wife dressed
herself, which vexed me that she was so long about
it, keeping us till past five o'clock before she was ready.
She ready ; and taking some bottles of wine, and beer,
and some cold fowl with us into the coach, we took
coach and four horses, which I had provided last
night, and so away. A very fine day, and so towards
Epsom, talking all the way pleasantly, and particularly
of the pride and ignorance of Mrs. Lowther, in having
of her train carried up. The country very fine, only
the way very dusty. To Epsom, by eight o'clock, to
the well ; where much company, and I drank the
water : they did not, but I did drink four pints. And
to the town, to the King's Head ; and hear that my
Lord Buckhurst and Nelly are lodged at the next
house, and Sir Charles Sedley with them ; and keep
a merry house. Poor girl ! I pity her ; but more
the loss of her at the King's house. W. Hewer rode
with us, and I left him and the women, and myself
walked to church, where few people to what I ex-
pected, and none I knew, but all the Houblons,
brothers, and them after sermon I did salute, and walk
with towards my inn. James did tell me that I was
the only happy man of the Navy, of whom, he says,
during all this freedom the people hath taken to
speaking treason, he hath not heard one bad word of
me, which is a great joy to me ; for I hear the same
of others, but do know that I have deserved as well
292



SAMUEL PEPYS



as most. We parted to meet anon, and I to my women
into a better room, which the people of the house
borrowed for us, and there to a good dinner, and were
merry, and Pembleton come to us, who happened to
be in the house, and there talked and were merry.

After dinner, he gone, we all lay down (the day being
wonderful hot) to sleep, and each of us took a good
nap, and then rose . . . and we took coach and to take
the air, there being a fine breeze abroad ; and I carried
them to the well, and there filled some bottles of
water to carry home with me ; and there I talked with
the two women that farm the well, at £iz per annum,
of the lord of the manor. . . Here W. Hewer's horse
broke loose, and we had the sport to see him taken again.
Then I carried them to see my cousin Pepys's house,
and 'light, and walked round about it, and they like
it, as indeed it deserves, very well, and is a pretty
place ; and then I walked them to the wood hard
by, and there got them in the thickets till they lost
themselves, and I could not find the way into any of
the walks in the wood, which indeed are very pleasant,
if I could have found them. At last got out of the
wood again ; and I, by leaping down the little bank,
coming out of the wood, did sprain my right foot,
which brought me great present pain, but presently,
with walking, it went away for the present, and so the
women and W. Hewer and I walked upon the Downes,
where a flock of sheep was ; and the most pleasant
and innocent sight that ever I saw in my life. We
found a shepherd and his little boy reading, far from
any houses or sight of people, the Bible to him ; so
I made the boy read to me, which he did, with the
forced tone that children do usually read, that was
mighty pretty, and then I did give him something,

*93



SAMUEL PEPYS



and went to the father, and talked with him ; and I
find he had been a servant in my cousin Pepys's house,
and told me what was become of their old servants.
He did content himself mightily in my liking his boy's
reading, and did bless God for him, the most like one
of the old patriarchs that ever I saw in my life, and it
brought those thoughts of the old age of the world
in my mind for two or three days after. We took
notice of his woollen knit stockings of two colours
mixed, and of his shoes shod with iron, both at the toe
and heels, and with great nails in the soles of his feet,
which was mighty pretty ; and, taking notice of them,
' why,' says the poor man, ' the downes, you see, are
full of stones, and we are fain to shoe ourselves thus ;
and these,' says he, ' will make the stones fly till they
ring before me.' I did give the poor man something,
for which he was mighty thankful, and I tried to cast
stones with his horn crook. He values his dog mightily,
that would turn a sheep any way which he would
have him, when he goes to fold them : told me there
was about eighteen score sheep in his flock, and that
he hath four shillings a-week the year round for keeping
of them : and Mrs. Turner, in the common fields here,
did gather one of the prettiest nosegays that ever I saw
in my life.

So to our coach, and through Mr. Minnes's wood,
and looked upon Mr. Evelyn's house ; and so over
the common, and through Epsom town to our inn,
in the way stopping a poor woman with her milk-
pail, and in one of my gilt tumblers did drink our
bellyfuls of milk, better than any cream ; and so to
our inn, and there had a dish of cream, but it was sour,
and so had no pleasure in it ; and so paid our reckoning,
and took coach, it being about seven at night, and
294



SAMUEL PEPYS

passed and saw the people walking with their wives
and children to take the air, ^nd we set out for home,
the sun by and by going down, and we in the cool of
the evening all the way with much pleasure home,
talking and pleasing ourselves with the pleasure of
this day's work. Mrs. Turner mightily pleased with
my resolution, which, I tell her, is never to keep
a country-house, but to keep a coach, and with my
wife on the Saturday to go sometimes for a day to
this place, and then quit to another place ; and there
is more variety and as little charge, and no trouble,
as there is in a country-house. Anon it grew dark,
and we had the pleasure to see several glow-worms,
which was mighty pretty, but my foot begins more
and more to pain me, which Mrs. Turner, by keeping
her warm hand upon it, did much ease : but so that
when we come home, which was just at eleven at
night, I was not able to walk from the lane's end to
my house without being helped. So to bed, and there
had a cere-cloth laid to my foot, but in great pain all
night long.

Diary

igg aAmantium irae

JAN. 12, 1668-9. Tins evening I observed my wife
mighty dull, and I myself was not mighty fond,
because of some hard words she did give me at noon,
out of a jealousy at my being abroad this morning,
which, God knows, it was upon the business of the
Office unexpectedly ; but I to bed, not thinking but
she would come after me. But waking by and by,
out of a slumber, which I usually fall into presently
after my coming into the bed, I found she did not

29s



SAMUEL PEPYS



prepare to come to bed, but got fresh candles, and
more wood for her fire, it being mighty cold, too.
At this being troubled, I after a while prayed her to
come to bed ; so, after an hour or two, she silent, and
I now and then praying her to come to bed, she fell
into a fury, that I was a rogue, and false to her. I did,
as I might truly, deny it, and was mightily troubled,
but all would not serve. At last, about one o'clock,
she came to my side of the bed, and drew my curtain
open, and with the tongs red hot at the ends, made as
if she did design to pinch me with them, at which, in
dismay, I rose up, and with a few words she laid them
down ; and did by little and little, very sillily, let all
the discourse fall ; and about two, but with much
seeming difficulty, come to bed, and there lay well all
night, and long in bed talking together, with much
pleasure, it being, I know, nothing but her doubt of
my going out yesterday, without telling her of my
going, which did vex her, poor wretch ! last night,
and I cannot blame her jealousy, though it do vex
me to the heart.

Diary

SIR GEORGE SAVILE, MARQUIS
OF HALIFAX

1633-1695

200 Qharles II

WHEN once the Aversion to bear Uneasiness
taketh place in a Man's Mind it doth so check
all the Passions that they are damped into a kind of
Indifference ; they grow faint and languishing, and
come to be subordinate to that fundamental Maxim
of not purchasing anything at the price of a Difficulty.
396



SIR GEORGE SAVILE

This made that he had as little Eagerness to oblige
as he had to hurt Men ; the Motive of his giving
Bounties was rather to make Men less uneasy to him
than more easy to themselves ; and yet no ill-nature
all this while. He would slide from an asking Face,
and could guess very well. It was throwing a Man
off from his Shoulders that leaned upon them with his
whole weight, so that the Party was not gladder to
receive than he was to give. . .

That Men have the less Ease for their loving it so
much is so far from a wonder that it is a natural
Consequence, especially in the case of a Prince. Ease
is seldom got without some pains, but it is yet seldomer
kept without them. He thought giving would make
Men more easy to him, whereas he might have known
it would certainly make them more troublesome.

When Men receive Benefits from Princes they
attribute less to his Generosity than to their own
Deserts ; so that in their own Opinion their Merit
cannot be bounded ; by that mistaken Rule it can as
little be satisfied. They would take it for a diminution
to have it circumscribed. Merit hath a Thirst upon
it that can never be quenched by golden Showers. It
is not only still ready, but greedy to receive more.
This King Charles found in as many Instances as any
Prince that ever reigned, because the Easiness of
Access introducing the good Success of their first
Request, they were the more encouraged to repeat
those Importunities, which had been more effectually
stopped in the Beginning by a short and resolute
Denial. But his Nature did not dispose him to that
Method ; it directed him rather to put off the
troublesome Minute for the time, and that being his
Inclination he did not care to struggle with it. . .

297



SIR GEORGE SAVILE



It must be allowed he had a little Over-balance on
the well-natured Side — not Vigour enough to be
earnest to do a kind Thing, much less to do a harsh
one ; but if a hard thing was done to another Man he
did not eat his Supper the worse for it.

A Character of King Charles the Second

201 Look to your <SMoat

I WILL make no other Introduction to the following
Discourse, than that as the Importance of our being
strong at Sea was ever very great, so in our present
Circumstances it is grown to be much greater ;
because, as formerly our Force in Shipping con-
tributed greatly to our Trade and Safety, so now it is
become indispensably necessary to our very being.

It may be said now to England, Martha, Martha,
thou art busy about many things, but one thing is neces-
sary. To the question, What shall we do to be saved
in this World ? there is no other answer but this,
Look to your Moat.

The first Article of an Englishman's Political Creed
must be, That he believeth in the Sea, &c, without
that there needeth no General Council to pronounce
him incapable of Salvation here.

We are in an Island, confined to it by God Almighty,
not as a Penalty but a Grace, and one of the greatest
that can be given to Mankind. Happy confinement,
that hath made us Free, Rich, and Quiet ; a fair
Portion in this World, and very well worth the
preserving ; a Figure that ever hath been envied, and
could never be imitated by our Neighbours. Our
Situation hath made Greatness abroad by Land Con-
298



MARQUIS OF HALIFAX

quests unnatural things to us. It is true, we have made
Excursions, and glorious ones too, which make our
Names great in History, but they did not last.

A Rough Draft of a New Model at Sea

ROBERT SOUTH

1634-1716

202 Hypocrites

BODILY Abstinence, joined with a demure,
affected countenance, is often called and accounted
Piety and Mortification. Suppose a Man infinitely
ambitious, and equally spiteful and malicious ; one
who poisons the ears of great men by venomous
Whispers, and rises by the fall of better Men than
himself ; yet if he steps forth with a Friday-look and
a Lenten face, with a blessed. Jesu ! and a mournful
Ditty for the Vices of the times, oh ! then he is a Saint
upon Earth ; an Ambrose or an Augustine ; I mean not
for that earthly trash of book-learning ; for, alas !
such are above that, or at least that 's above them ;
but for Zeal, and for Fasting, for a devout Elevation
of the Eyes, and an holy Rage against other Men's
Sins. And happy those Ladies and religious Dames,
characterized in 2 Tim. iii. 6, who can have such self-
denying, thriving, able Men for their Confessors ! and
thrice happy those Families, where they vouchsafe to
take their Friday-Night's Refreshments ! and thereby
demonstrate to the world what Christian Abstinence,
and what primitive, self-mortifying Rigour there is in
forbearing a Dinner, that they may have the better
Stomach to their Supper.

In fine, the whole World stands in Admiration of
them ; Fools are fond of them, and wise Men are

299



ROBERT SOUTH



afraid of them ; they are talked of, they are pointed
at ; and as they order the matter, they draw the
Eyes of all Men after them, and generally something
else.

But as it is observed in Greyhounds, that the thin-
ness of their Jaws does not at all allay the ravening
fury of their Appetite, there being no Creature whose
teeth are sharper, and whose feet are swifter when
they are in pursuit of their Prey ; so woe be to that
Man who stands in the way of a meagre, mortified,
fasting, sharp-set Zeal, when it is in full chase of its
spiritual Game. And therefore, as the Apostle ad-
monishes the Philippians, Phil. iii. 2, To beware of
Dogs, so his advice cannot be too frequently remem-
bered, nor too warily observed, when we have to deal
with those who are always fawning upon some and
biting others, as shall best serve their Occasions.

Sermon : On the Mischievous Influence of Words and
Names falsely applied

THOMAS BURNET

16357-1715

203 Dies irae, dies ilia

WHERE are now the great Empires of the World,
and their great Imperial Cities ? Their Pillars,
Trophies, and Monuments of Glory ? Show me where
they stood, read the Inscription, tell me the Victor's
Name. What Remains, what Impressions, what Differ-
ence or Distinction do you see in this Mass of Fire f

Rome itself, Eternal Rome, the Great City, the
Empress of the World, whose domination and super-
300



THOMAS BURNET

stition, antient and modern, make a great part of
the History of this Earth, what is become of her now f
She laid her Foundations deep, and her Palaces were
strong and sumptuous ; She glorified herself and lived
deliciously ; and said in her heart, I sit a Queen, and
shall see no sorrow. But her hour is come, she is wiped
away from the face of the Earth, and buried in per-
petual oblivion. But 'tis not Cities only, and works
of men's hands, but the everlasting Hills, the Moun-
tains and Rocks of the Earth are melted as wax before
the Sun ; and their place is nowhere found.

Here stood the Alps, a prodigious range of stone,
the Load of the Earth, that covered many Countries,
and reached their arms from the Ocean to the Black
Sea ; this huge mass of Stone is softened and dissolved,
as a tender Cloud into Rain. Here stood the African
Mountains, and Atlas with his Top above the Clouds.
There was frozen Caucasus, and Taurus, and Imaus,
and the Mountains of Asia. And yonder towards the
North, stood the Riphaean Hills, clothed in Ice and
Snow. All these are vanished, dropped away as the
Snow upon their Heads, and swallowed up in a Red
Sea of Fire.

A Sacred Theory of the Earth

THOMAS SPRAT, BISHOP OF
ROCHESTER

1635-1713

204 The Philosophy of the Primitive
Qhurch

THIS was the Condition of Philosophy when the
Christian Religion came into the World. That
maintained itself in its first Age by the Innocence,

301



THOMAS SPRAT



and Miracles, and Sufferings of its Founder and his
Apostles. But after their Deaths, when Christianity
began to spread into the farthest Nations, and when
the Power of Working Wonders had ceased, it was
thought necessary for its Increase that its Professors
should be able to defend it against the Subtilities of
the Heathens by those same ways of Arguing which
were then in use among the Heathen Philosophers. It
was therefore on this Account that the Fathers and
chief Doctors of our Church applied themselves to
the Peripatetick and Platonick Sects ; but chiefly to
the Platonick, because that seemed to speak plainer
about the Divine Nature ; and also because the
Sweetness and Powerfulness of Plato's Writings did
serve as well to make them popular Speakers as Dis-
puters. Having thus provided themselves against
their Adversaries they easily got the Victory over them.
And though the idolatrous Gentiles had kept the
Instruments of disputing in their own Hands so many
hundred Years, yet they soon convinced them of the
Ridiculousness of their Worship, and the Purity and
Reasonableness of ours.

But now the Christians having had so good Success
against the Religions of the Heathens by their own
Weapons, instead of laying them down when they had
done, unfortunately fell to manage them one against
another. So many subtile Brains having been set on
work and warmed against a Foreign Enemy, when that
was over, and they had nothing else to do (like an
Army that returns victorious and is not presently
disbanded) they began to spoil and quarrel amongst
themselves. Hence that Religion, which at first
appeared so innocent and peaceable, and fitted for
the benefit of human Society, which consisted in the
302



BISHOP OF ROCHESTER

plain and direct Rules of good Life and Charity, and
the Belief in a Redemption by one Saviour, was
miserably divided into a thousand intricate Questions,
which neither advance true Piety nor good Manners.

The History of the Royal Society

205 The cpiague

THE Plague was indeed an irreparable Damage to
the whole Kingdom ; but that which chiefly
added to the Misery was the Time wherein it happened.
For what could be a more deplorable Accident than
that so many brave Men should be cut off by the
Arrow that flies in the dark, when our Country was
engaged in a foreign IV ar, and when their Lives might
have been honourably ventured on a glorious Theatre
in its Defence ? And we had scarce recovered this
first Misfortune when we received a second and a deeper
Wound ; which cannot be equalled in all History, if
either we consider the Obscurity of its Beginning, the
irresistible Violence of its Progress, the Horror of its
Appearance, or the Wideness of the Ruin it made,
in one of the most renowned Cities of the World.

Yet when, on the one side, I remember what
Desolation these Scourges of Mankind have left behind
them ; and on the other, when I reflect on the
Magnanimity wherewith the English Nation did
support the Mischiefs ; I find that I have not more
Reason to bewail the one than to admire the other.

Upon our Return after the abating of the Plague,
what else could we expect but to see the Streets
unfrequented, the River forsaken, the Fields deformed
with the Graves of the Dead, and the Terrors of Death

303



THOMAS SPRAT

still abiding on the Faces of the living ? But instead
of such dismal Sights there appeared almost the same
Throngs in all publick Places, the same Noise of
Busmen, the same Freedom of Converse, and, with
the Return of the King, the same Cheerfulness return-
ing on the Minds of the People as before.

Nor was their Courage less in sustaining the second
Calamity, which destroyed their Houses and Estates.
This the greatest Losers endured with such undaunted
Firmness of Mind that their Example may incline us
to believe that not only the best Natural, but the best
Moral Philosophy too, may be learned from the Shops
of Mechanicks. It was indeed an admirable Thing
to behold with what Constancy the meanest Artificers
saw all the Labours of their Lives and the Support of
their Famthes devoured in an instant. The Affliction,
'tis true, was widely spread over the whole Nation ;
every Place was filled with Signs of Pity and Commisera-
tion ; but those who had suffered most seemed the
least affected with the Loss : no unmanly Bewaihngs
were heard in the few Streets that were preserved ;
they beheld the Ashes of their Houses and Gates and
Temples without the least Expression of Pusillanimity.
If Philosophers had done this it had well become
their Profession of Wisdom ; if Gentlemen, the
Nobleness of their Breeding and Blood would have
required it : but that such Greatness of Heart should
be found amongst the poor Jrtizans and the obscure
Multitude is no doubt one of the most honourable
Events that ever happened. Yet still there is one
Circumstance behind which may raise our W onder
higher ; and that is, that amidst such horrible Ruins
they still prosecuted the War with the same Vigour
and Courage against three of the most powerful
3°4



BISHOP OF ROCHESTER

States of all Europe. What Records of Time, or
Memory of past Ages, can show us a greater Testimony
of an invincible and heroick Genius than this of which
I now speak? that the Sound of the Heralds pro-
claiming new Wars should be pleasant to the People,
when the sad Voice of the Bell-man was scarce yet
gone out of their Ears ? That the Increase of their
Adversaries Confederates, and of their own Calamities,
should be so far from affrighting them, that they
rather seemed to receive from thence a new Vigour
and Resolution! and that they should still be eager
upon V ictories and Triumphs when they were thought
almost quite exhausted by so great Destructions ?

The Htslery of the Royal Soctety

EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, BISHOP
OF WORCESTER

1635-1699

206 London's Judgement by Fire

100K now upon me, you who so lately admired the
j greatness of my trade, the riches of my merchants,
the number of my people, the conveniency of my
Churches, the multitude of my Streets, and see what
desolations sin hath made in the earth. Look upon me,
and then tell me whether it be nothing to dally with
Heaven, to make a mock at sin, to slight the judgements
of God, and abuse his mercies, and after all the
attempts of Heaven to reclaim a people from their
sins, to remain still the same that ever they were?
Was there no way to expiate your guilt but by my
misery ? Had the leprosy of your sins so fretted into
my walls, that there was no cleansing them, but by
the flames which consume them? Must I mourn in

3°5



EDWARD STILLINGFLEET

my dust and ashes for your iniquities, while you are
so ready to return to the practice of them ? Have
I suffered so much by reason of them, and do you
think to escape yourselves f Can you then look upon
my ruins with hearts as hard and unconcerned as the
stones which lie in them ? If you have any kindness
for me, or for yourselves ; if you ever hope to see
my breaches repaired, my beauty restored, my glory
advanced, look on London's ruins and repent. Thus
would she bid her inhabitants not weep for her
miseries, but for their own sins ; for if never any
sorrow were like to her sorrow, it is because never any
sins were like to their sins. Not as though they were
only the sins of the City which have brought this evil
upon her ; no, but as far as the judgement reaches,
so great hath the compass of the sins been, which have
provoked God to make her an example of his justice.
And I fear the effects of London's calamity will be
felt all the Nation over. For, considering the present
languishing condition of this Nation, it will be no easy
matter to recover the blood and spirits which have
been lost by this Fire.

Sermon preached after the Great Fire of London

JOSEPH GLANVILL

1636-1680

207 The Scholar Cfipsy

THERE was very lately a Lad in the University
of Oxford, who being of very pregnant and ready
parts, and yet wanting the encouragement of prefer-
ment ; was by his poverty forced to leave his studies
there, and to cast himself upon the wide world for
a livelihood. Now, his necessities growing daily on
306



JOSEPH GLANVILL

him, and wanting the help of friends to relieve him ;
he was at last forced to joyn himself to a company of
Vagabond Gypsies, whom occasionally he met with,
and to follow their Trade for a maintenance. Among
these extravagant people, by the insinuating subtilty
of his carriage, he quickly got so much of their love,
and esteem ; as that they discovered to him their
Mystery : in the practice of which, by the pregnancy
of his wit and parts he soon grew so good a proficient,
as to be able to out-do his Instructours. After he
had been a pretty well while exercised in the Trade ;
there chanced to ride by a couple of Scholars who had
formerly bin of his acquaintance. The Scholars had
quickly spied out their old friend, among the Gypsies ;
and their amazement to see him among such society,
had well-nigh discovered him : but by a sign he
prevented their owning him before that Crew : and
taking one of them aside privately, desired him with
his friend to go to an Inn, not far distant thence,
promising there to come to them. They accordingly
went thither, and he follows : after their first saluta-
tions, his friends enquire how he came to lead so odd
a life as that was, and to join himself with such
a cheating beggerly company. The Scholar-Gypsy
having given them an account of the necessity, which
drove him to that kind of life ; told them, that the
people he went with were not such Impostors as they
were taken for, but that they had a traditional kind
of learning among them, and could do wonders by
the power of Imagination, and that himself had learnt
much of their Art, and improved it further then
themselves could. And to evince the truth of what
he told them, he said, he'd remove into another
room, leaving them to discourse together ; and upon

3°7



JOSEPH GLANVILL

his return tell them the sum of what they had talked
of : which accordingly he performed, giving them
a full account of what had passed between them in
his absence. The Scholars being amazed at so unex-
pected a discovery, earnestly desired him to unriddle
the mystery. In which he gave them satisfaction, by
telling them, that what he did was by the power of
Imagination, his Phancy binding theirs ; and that
himself had dictated to them the discourse they held
together, while he was from them : That there were
warrantable wayes of heightening the Imagination to
that pitch, as to bind another's ; and that when he
had compassed the whole secret, some parts of which
he said he was yet ignorant of, he intended to leave
their company, and give the world an account of what
he had learned.

The Vanity of Dogmatizing

THOMAS TRAHERNE

1636 '-1674

208 The Heir of zAll Things

YOU never enjoy the world aright, till the Sea
itself floweth in your veins, till you are clothed
with the heavens, and crowned with the stars : and
perceive yourself to be the sole heir of the whole world,
and more than so, because men are in it who are every
one sole heirs as well as you. Till you can sing and
rejoice and delight in God, as misers do in gold, and
Kings in sceptres, you never enjoy the world.

Till your spirit filleth the whole world, and the stars
are your jewels ; till you are as familiar with the ways
of God in all Ages as with your walk and table : till
you are intimately acquainted with that shady nothing
308



THOMAS TRAHERNE



out of which the world was made : till you love men
so as to desire their happiness, with a thirst equal to
the zeal of your own : till you delight in God for being
good to all : you never enjoy the world. Till you
more feel it than your private estate, and are more
present in the hemisphere, considering the glories and
the beauties there, than in your own house : Till
you remember how lately you were made, and how
wonderful it was when you came into it : and more
rejoice in the palace of your glory, than if it had been
made but to-day morning.

Centuries of Meditations

2og <>A Child's Vision of the World

WILL you see the infancy of this sublime and
celestial greatness f Those pure and virgin
apprehensions I had from the womb, and that divine
light wherewith I was born are the best unto this day,
wherein I can see the Universe. By the Gift of God
they attended me into the world, and by His special
favour I remember them till now. Verily they seem
the greatest gifts His wisdom could bestow, for without
them all other gifts had been dead and vain. They
are unattainable by book, and therefore I will teach
them by experience. Pray for them earnestly : for
they will make you angelical, and wholly celestial.
Certainly Adam in Paradise had not more sweet and
curious apprehensions of the world, than I when I
was a child

All appeared new, and strange at first, inexpressibly
rare and delightful and beautiful. I was a little
stranger, which at my entrance into the world was
saluted and surrounded with innumerable joys. My

•509



THOMAS TRAHERNE



knowledge was Divine. I knew by intuition those
things which since my Apostasy, I collected again by
the highest reason. My very ignorance was advan-
tageous. I seemed as one brought into the Estate of
Innocence. All things were spotless and pure and
glorious : yea, and infinitely mine, and joyful and
precious. I knew not that there were any sins, or
complaints or laws. I dreamed not of poverties,
contentions, or vices. All tears and quarrels were
hidden from mine eyes. Everything was at rest, free
and immortal. I knew nothing of sickness or death
or rents or exaction, either for tribute or bread. In
the absence of these I was entertained like an Angel
with the works of God in their splendour and glory,
I saw all in the peace of Eden ; Heaven and Earth
did sing my Creator's praises, and could not make
more melody to Adam, than to me. All Time was
Eternity, and a perpetual Sabbath. Is it not strange,
that an infant should be heir of the whole World, and
see those mysteries which the books of the learned
never unfold?

The corn was orient and immortal wheat, which
never should be reaped, nor was ever sown. I thought
it had stood from everlasting to everlasting. The dust
and stones of the street were as precious as gold : the
gates were at first the end of the world. The green
trees when I saw them first through one of the gates
transported and ravished me, their sweetness and
unusual beauty made my heart to leap, and almost
mad with ecstasy, they were such strange and wonder-
ful things. The Men ! O what venerable and
reverend creatures did the aged seem ! Immortal
Cherubims ! And young men glittering and sparkling
Angels, and maids strange seraphic pieces of life and
310



THOMAS TRAHERNE

beauty ! Boys and girls tumbling in the street, and
playing, were moving jewels. I knew not that they
were born or should die ; But all things abided
eternally as they were in their proper places. Eternity
was manifest in the Light of the Day, and something
infinite behind everything appeared : which talked
with my expectation and moved my desire. The city
seemed to stand in Eden, or to be built in Heaven.
The streets were mine, the temple was mine, the
people were mine, their clothes and gold and silver
were mine, as much as their sparkling eyes, fair skins,
and ruddy faces. The skies were mine, and so were
the sun and moon and stars, and all the World was
mine ; and I the only spectator and enjoyer of it.

Centuries of Meditations

210 Love a Trinity

IN all Love there is a love begetting, and a love
begotten, and a love proceeding. Which though
they are one in essence subsist nevertheless in three
several manners. For love is benevolent affection to
another : Which is of itself, and by itself relateth to
its object. It floweth from itself and resteth in its
object. Love proceedeth of necessity from itself,
for unless it be of itself it is not Love. Constraint
is destructive and opposite to its nature. The Love
from which it floweth is the fountain of Love. The
Love which streameth from it, is the communication
of Love, or Love communicated. The Love which
resteth in the object is the Love which streameth to it.
So that in all Love, the Trinity is clear. By secret
passages without stirring it proceedeth to its object,
and is as powerfully present as if it did not proceed

3"



THOMAS TRAHERNE



at all. The Love that lieth in the bosom of the Lover,
being the love that is perceived in the spirit of the
Beloved : that is, the same in substance, though in
the manner of substance, or subsistence, different.
Love in the bosom is the parent of Love, Love in the
stream is the effect of Love, Love seen, or dwelling
in the object proceedeth from both. Yet are all these,
one and the self-same Love : though three Loves.

Centuries of Meditations



GILBERT BURNET, BISHOP OF
SALISBURY

i 643-1715

211 The Battle of Dunbar

THE army was indeed one of the best that ever
Scotland had brought together, but it was ill
commanded : for all that had made defection from
their cause, or that were thought indifferent as to
either side, which they called detestable neutrality,
were put out of commission. The preachers thought
it an army of saints, and seemed well assured of success.
They drew near Cromwell, who being pressed by them
retired towards Dunbar, where his ships and provisions
lay. The Scots followed him, and were posted on
a hill about a mile from thence, where there was no
attacking them. Cromwell was then in great distress,
and looked on himself as undone. There was no march-
ing towards Berwick, the ground was too narrow : Nor
could he come back into the country without being
separated from his ships, and starving his army. The
least evil seemed to be to kill his horses, and put his
army on board, and sail back to Newcastle ; which,
312



GILBERT BURNET

in the disposition that England was in at that time,
would have been all their destruction, for it would
have occasioned an universal insurrection for the King.
They had not above three days' forage for their horses.
So Cromwell called his officers to a day of seeking the
Lord, in their style. He loved to talk much of that
matter all his life long afterwards : He said he felt
such an enlargement of heart in prayer, and such
quiet upon it, that he bade all about him take heart,
for God had certainly heard them, and would appear
for them. After prayer they walked in the Earl of
Roxburgh's gardens, that lie under the hill : And by
prospective glasses they discerned a great motion in
the Scotish Camp : upon which Cromwell said, ' God
is delivering them into our hands, they are coming
down to us.' Leslie was in the chief command : but
he had a committee of the States with him to give him
his orders, among whom W amston was one. These
were weary of lying in the fields, and thought that
Leslie made not haste enough to destroy those Sectaries;
for so they loved to call them. He told them, by lying
there all was sure, but that by engaging into action
with gallant and desperate men all might be lost : Yet
they still called on him to fall on. Many have thought
that all this was treachery, done on design to deliver
up our army to Cromwell ; some laying it upon
Leslie, and others upon my uncle. I am persuaded
there was no treachery in it : only Warriston was too
hot, and Leslie was too cold, and yielded too easily to
their humours, which he ought not to have done.
They were all the night employed in coming down the
hill : And in the morning, before they were put in
order, Cromwell fell upon them. Two regiments
stood their ground, and were almost all killed in their

313



GILBERT BURNET



ranks : The rest did run in a most shameful manner :
So that both their artillery and baggage, and with these
a great many prisoners, were taken, some thousands
in all.

A History of His Own Time

212 The Conclusion of the Whole ^Matter

SO that by Religion I mean, such a Sense of divine
Truth, as enters into a Man, and becomes a Spring
of a new Nature within him ; reforming his Thoughts
and Designs, purifying his Heart, and sanctifying him,
and governing his whole Deportment, his Words as
well as his Actions ; convincing him that, it is not
enough, not to be scandalously vicious, or to be
innocent in his Conversation, but that he must be
entirely, uniformly and constantly pure and Virtuous,
animating him with a Zeal, to be still better and
better, more eminently good and exemplary, using
Prayers and all outward Devotions, as solemn Acts
testifying what he is inwardly and at heart, and as
Methods instituted by God, to be still advancing in
the use of them further and further, into a more
refined and spiritual Sense of divine Matters. This is
true Religion, which is the Perfection of Human
Nature, and the Joy and Delight of every one, that
feels it active and strong within him ; it is true this is
not arrived at all at once ; and it will have an unhappy
allay, hanging long even about a good Man : But, as
those ill Mixtures are the perpetual Grief of his Soul,
so it is his chief Care to watch over and to mortify
them ; he will be in a continual Progress, still gaining
ground upon himself : and, as he attains to a good
degree of purity, he will find a noble Flame of Life

314



BISHOP OF SALISBURY

and Joy growing upon him. Of this I write with the
more concern and Emotion, because I have felt this
the true and indeed the only Joy, which runs through
a Man's Heart and Life : It is that which has been
for many Years my greatest Support ; I rejoice daily
in it ; I feel from it the Earnest of that supreme Joy,
which I pant and long for ; I am sure there is nothing
else can afford any true or complete Happiness. I
have, considering my Sphere, seen a great deal of all
that is most shining and tempting in this World : The
Pleasures of Sense I did soon nauseate ; Intrigues of
State, and the Conduct of Affairs have something in
them that is more specious ; and I was, for some Years,
deeply immersed in these, but still with Hopes of
reforming the World, and of making Mankind wiser
and better : But I have found, That which is crooked
cannot be made straight. I acquainted myself with
Knowledge and Learning, and that in a great Variety,
and with more Compass than depth : but though
wisdom excelleth Folly, as much as Light does Darkness ;
yet, as it is a sore 'Travail, so it is so very defective,
that what is wanting to complete it, cannot be numbered.
I have seen that two were better than one, and that
a threefold Cord is not easily loosed ; and have therefore
cultivated Friendship with much Zeal and a disinter-
ested Tenderness ; but I have found this was also
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, though it be of the best
and noblest sort. So that, upon great and long
Experience, I could enlarge on the Preacher's Text,
Vanity of Vanities, and all is Vanity ; but I must also
conclude with him ; Fear God, and keep his Command-
ments, for this is the All of Man, the Whole both of
his Duty, and of his Happiness.

A History of His Own Time
315



WILLIAM PENN

1644-17 18

213 The Qomfort of Friends

THEY that love beyond the world cannot be
separated by it.
Death cannot kill what never dies.
Nor can spirits ever be divided, that love and live
in the same divine principle, the root and record of
their friendship.

If absence be not death, neither is theirs.
Death is but crossing the world, as friends do the
seas ; they live in one another still.

For they must needs be present, that love and live
in that which is omnipresent.

In this divine glass they see face to face ; and their
converse is free, as well as pure.

This is the comfort of friends, that though they may
be said to die, yet their friendship and society are, in
the best sense, ever present, because immortal.

Fruits of Solituie

ROGER NORTH

1653-1734

214 j u dg e y e jf r * es

A ND since nothing historical is amiss in a design like
XX. this, I will subjoin what I have personally noted
of that man, and some things of indubitable report
concerning him. His friendship and conversation
lay much among the good fellows and humorists ;
and his delights were accordingly drinking, laughing,
singing, and all the extravagances of the bottle. He
had a set of banterers for the most part near him, as
in old time great men kept fools to make them merry.
316



ROGER NORTH



And these fellows abusing one another and their
betters were a regale to him. And no friendship or
dearness could be so great in private, which he would
not use ill, and to an extravagant degree, in public.
No one that had any expectation from him was safe
from his public contempt and derision, which some
of his minions at the bar bitterly felt. Those above
or that could hurt or benefit him, and none else,
might depend on fair quarter at his hands. When he
was in temper, and matter indifferent came before him,
he became his seat of justice better than any I ever saw
in his place. He had extraordinary natural abilities,
but little acquired, beyond what practice in affairs had
supplied. He talked fluently and with spirit ; and
his weakness was that he could not reprehend without
scolding, and in such Billingsgate language as should
not come out of the mouth of any man. He called it
' Giving a lick with the rough side of his tongue '.

Life of ihe Lord Keeper Guilford

215 ^creations of a Qollege Don

THE doctor had no favourite diversion, or manual
exercise, to rest his mind a little, which he held
bent with continual thinking. His parents, who were
much addicted to music, recommended that to him
for a diversion, and particularly the noble organ, as
the fullest, and not only a complete solitary concert,
but most proper for an ecclesiastic. And indeed, if
study had not had the upper hand of all his intend-
ments, he must of course have taken up in that way,
his parents themselves being so fond of it. For after
the care of prayers and meals, nothing was more
constant and solemn than music was in that family.

3'7



ROGER NORTH

He was sensible the advice was very good, and accord-
ingly got a small organ into his chamber at Jesus
College, and suffered himself to be taught a lesson
or two, which he practised over when he had a mind
to be unbent ; but he made no manner of advance,
and one accident put him out of all manner of conceit
of it. His under neighbour was a morose and importune
master of arts ; and one night the doctor could not
sleep ; and thought to fit himself for it by playing
upon his organ. The bellows knocking on the floor,
and the hum of the pipes, made a strange din at
midnight, and the gentleman below, that never heard
it so before, could not tell what to make of it ; but,
at length, he found it out to be his neighbour's organ.
And thereupon, to retaliate this night's work, got out
of his bed, and, with his two couple of bowls, went
to bowls by himself. This made a much louder noise
than the organ, and the doctor was as much at a loss
to know what that meant, but, suspecting how the
case stood, he left off, and scarce ever touched his
organ after. The pleasure of music is like that of
books, never true and good, unless easily and famdiarly
read, and performed ; and then nothing is more
medicinal to a crazy and fatigued mind than that.

Life of the Hon. and Rev. Dr. John North

DANIEL DEFOE

1661-1731

216 Qrusoe visits the Wreck

A LITTLE after noon I found the sea very calm,
and the tide ebbed so far out, that I could come
within a quarter of a mile of the ship ; and here
I found a fresh renewing of my grief, for I saw evidently,
318



DANIEL DEFOE

that if we had kept on board we had been all safe, that
is to say, we had all got safe on shore, and I had not
been so miserable as to be left entirely destitute of all
comfort and company, as I now was. This forced
tears from my eyes again ; but as there was little relief
in that, I resolved, if possible, to get to the ship ; so
I pulled off my cloaths, for the weather was hot to
extremity, and took the water. But when I came to
the ship, my difficulty was still greater to know how
to get on board ; for as she lay aground, and high out
of the water, there was nothing within my reach to
lay hold of. I swam round her twice, and the second
time I spied a small piece of a rope, which I wondered
I did not see at first, hang down by the fore-chains
so low, as that with great difficulty I got hold of it,
and by the help of that rope got up into the forecastle
of the ship. Here I found that the ship was bdged,
and had a great deal of water in her hold, but that she
lay so on the side of a bank of hard sand, or rather earth,
that her stern lay lifted up upon the bank, and her
head low almost to the water. By this means all her
quarter was free, and all that was in that part was dry ;
for you may be sure my first work was to search and
to see what was spoiled and what was free. And first
I found that all the ship's provisions were dry and
untouched by the water ; and being very well disposed
to eat, I went to the bread-room and filled my pockets
with biscuit, and eat it as I went about other things,
for I had no time to lose. I also found some rum in
the great cabin, of which I took a large dram, and which
I had indeed need enough of to spirit me for what was
before me. Now I wanted nothing but a boat, to
furnish myself with many things which I foresaw would
be very necessary to me.

319



DANIEL DEFOE



It was in vain to sit still and wish for what was not
to be had, and this extremity roused my application.
We had several spare yards, and two or three large
spars of wood, and a spare top-mast or two in the
ship. I resolved to fall to work with these, and flung
as many of them overboard as I could manage for
their weight, tying every one with a rope, that they
might not drive away. When this was done I went
down the ship's side, and, pulling them to me, I tied
four of them fast together at both ends as well as I
could, in the form of a raft ; and laying two or three
short pieces of plank upon them crossways, I found
I could walk upon it very well, but that it was not
able to bear any great weight, the pieces being too
light. So I went to work, and with the carpenter's
saw I cut a spare top-mast into three lengths, and
added them to my raft, with a great deal of labour
and pains ; but hope of furnishing myself with
necessaries encouraged me to go beyond what I should
have been able to have done upon another occasion.

My raft was now strong enough to bear any reason-
able weight. My next care was what to load it with,
and how to preserve what I laid upon it from the surf
of the sea ; but I was not long considering this. I first
laid all the planks or boards upon it that I could get,
and having considered well what I most wanted, I
first got three of the seamen's chests, which I had
broken open and emptied, and lowered them down
upon my raft. The first of these I filled with provisions,
viz., bread, rice, three Dutch cheeses, five pieces of
dried goat's flesh, which we lived much upon, and a
little remainder of European corn, which had been
laid by for some fowls which we brought to sea with
us, but the fowls were killed. There had been some
320



DANIEL DEFOE



barley and wheat together, but, to my great disappoint-
ment, I found afterwards that the rats had eaten or
spoiled it all. As for liquors, I found several cases of
bottles belonging to our skipper, in which were some
cordial waters, and, in all, about five or six gallons of
rack. These I stowed by themselves, there being no
need to put them into the chest, nor no room for
them. While I was doing this, I found the tide began
to flow, though very calm, and I had the mortification
to see my coat, shirt, and waistcoat, which I had left
on shore upon the sand, swim away ; as for my
breeches, which were only linen, and open-kneed,
I swam on board in them, and my stockings. However,
this put me upon rummaging for clothes, of which
I found enough, but took no more than I wanted for
present use ; for I had other things which my eye
was more upon, as first tools to work with on shore ;
and it was after long searching that I found out the
carpenter's chest, which was indeed a very useful prize
to me, and much more valuable than a ship-loading
of gold would have been at that time. I got it down
to my raft, even whole as it was, without losing time
to look into it, for I knew in general what it contained.

My next care was for some ammunition and arms ;
there were two very good fowling-pieces in the great
cabin, and two pistols ; these I secured first, with some
powder-horns, and a small bag of shot, and two old
rusty swords. I knew there were three barrels of
powder in the ship, but knew not where our gunner
had stowed them ; but with much search I found them,
two of them dry and good, the third had taken water ;
those two I got to my raft with the arms. And now I
thought myself pretty well freighted, and began to
think how I should get to shore with them, having

2830 M 321



DANIEL DEFOE



neither sail, oar, or rudder ; and the least capful of
wind would have overset all my navigation.

I had three encouragements, i. A smooth, calm
sea. 2. The tide rising and setting in to the shore.
3. What little wind there was blew me towards the
land. And thus, having found two or three broken
oars belonging to the boat, and besides the tools which
were in the chest, I found two saws, an axe, and
a hammer, and with this cargo I put to sea. For a
mile or thereabouts my raft went very well, only that
I found it drive a little distant from the place where I
had landed before, by which I perceived that there was
some indraft of the water, and consequently I hoped
to find some creek or river there, which I might make
use of as a port to get to land with my cargo.

Robinson Crusoe

217 The Footprint

IT happened one day, about noon, going towards
my boat, I was exceedingly surprised with the print
of a man's naked foot on the shore, which was very
plain to be seen in the sand. I stood like one thunder-
struck, or as if I had seen an apparition. I listened,
I looked round me, I could hear nothing, nor see
anything. I went up to a rising ground, to look farther.
I went up the shore, and down the shore, but it was
all one ; I could see no other impression but that one.
I went to it again to see if there were any more, and
to observe if it might not be my fancy ; but there was
no room for that, for there was exactly the very print
of a foot — toes, heel, and every part of a foot. How
it came thither I knew not, nor could in the least
imagine. But after innumerable fluttering thoughts,
322



DANIEL DEFOE

like a man perfectly confused and out of myself, I came
home to my fortification, not feeling, as we say, the
ground I went on, but terrified to the last degree,
looking behind me at every two or three steps, mis-
taking every bush and tree, and fancying every stump
at a distance to be a man ; nor is it possible to describe
how many various shapes affrighted imagination
represented things to me in, how many wild ideas were
found every moment in my fancy, and what strange,
unaccountable whimsies came into my thoughts by
the way.

When I came to my castle, for so I think I called
it ever after this, I fled into it like one pursued.
Whether I went over by the ladder, as first contrived,
or went in at the hole in the rock, which I called a
door, I cannot remember ; no, nor could I remember
the next morning, for never frighted hare fled to cover,
or fox to earth, with more terror of mind than I to
this retreat.

Robinson Crusoe

218 London in '•Plague T'ime

DURING the month of July, and while, as I have
observed, our part of the town seemed to be
spared in comparison of the west part, I went
ordinarily about the streets, as my business required,
and particularly went generally once in a day, or in
two days, into the city, to my brother's house, which
he had given me charge of, and to see if it was safe ;
and having the key in my pocket, I used to go into
the house, and over most of the rooms, to see that all
was well ; for though it be something wonderful to
tell, that any should have hearts so hardened, in the

323



DANIEL DEFOE



midst of such a calamity, as to rob and steal ; yet
certain it is, that all sorts of villanies, and even levities
and debaucheries, were then practised in the town,
as openly as ever, I will not say quite as frequently,
because the numbers of people were many ways
lessened.

But the city itself began now to be visited too,
I mean within the walls ; but the number of people
there were, indeed, extremely lessened, by so great
a multitude having been gone into the country ;
and even all this month of July, they continued to
flee, though not in such multitudes as formerly. In
August, indeed, they fled in such a manner, that I
began to think there would be really none but
magistrates and servants left in the city. . . The face
of London was now indeed strangely altered, I mean
the whole mass of buildings, city, liberties, suburbs,
Westminster, Southwark, and altogether ; for, as to
the particular part called the city, or within the
walls, that was not yet much infected ; but in the
whole, the face of things, I say, was much altered ;
sorrow and sadness sat upon every face, and though
some part were not yet overwhelmed, yet all looked
deeply concerned ; and as we saw it apparently coming
on, so every one looked on himself, and his family,
as in the utmost danger : were it possible to represent
those times exactly, to those that did not see them,
and give the reader due ideas of the horror that
everywhere presented itself, it must make just impres-
sions upon their minds, and fill them with surprise.
London might well be said to be all in tears ! the
mourners did not go about the streets indeed, for
nobody put on black, or made a formal dress of mourn-
ing for their nearest friends ; but the voice of mourning
324



DANIEL DEFOE

was truly heard in the streets ; the shrieks of women
and children at the windows and doors of their
houses, where their dearest relations were, perhaps
dying, or just dead, were so frequent to be heard,
as we passed the streets, that it was enough to pierce
the stoutest heart in the world to hear them. Tears
and lamentations were seen almost in every house,
especially in the first part of the visitation ; for
towards the latter end, men's hearts were hardened,
and death was so always before their eyes, that they
did not so much concern themselves for the loss of
their friends, expecting that themselves should be
summoned the next hour.

Business led me out sometimes to the other end of
the town, even when the sickness was chiefly there ;
and as the thing was new to me, as well as to everybody
else, it was a most surprising thing to see those streets,
which were usually so thronged, now grown desolate,
and so few people to be seen in them, that if I had been
a stranger, and at a loss for my way, I might sometimes
have gone the length of a whole street, I mean of the
by-streets, and see nobody to direct me, except
watchmen set at the doors of such houses as were
shut up ; of which I shall speak presently.

One day, being at that part of the town, on some
special business, curiosity led me to observe things
more than usually ; and indeed I walked a great way
where I had no business ; I went up Holborn, and
there the street was full of people ; but they walked
in the middle of the great street, neither on one side
or other, because, as I suppose, they would not mingle
with anybody that came out of the houses, or meet with
smells and scents from houses that might be infected.

The inns of court were all shut up, nor were very

3 2 5



DANIEL DEFOE



many of the lawyers in the Temple, or Lincoln's-Inn,
or Gray's-Inn, to be seen there. Everybody was at
peace, there was no occasion for lawyers ; besides, it
being in the time of the vacation too, they were gene-
rally gone into the country. Whole rows of houses in
some places, were shut close up, the inhabitants all fled,
and only a watchman or two left.

A Journal of the Plague Year

219 <t4 Young 'Thiej

1

NOTHING could be more perplexing than this
money was to me all that night. I carried it
in my hand a good while, for it was in gold, all but
14-f. ; and that is to say, it was in four guineas, and
that \\s. was more difficult to carry than the four
guineas ; at last I sat down, and pulled off one of my
shoes, and put the four guineas into that ; but after
I had gone a while, my shoe hurt me so I could not
go, so I was fain to sit down again, and take it out of
my shoe, and carry it in my hand ; then I found
a dirty linen rag in the street, and I took that up, and
wrapped it all together, and carried it in that a good
way. I have often since heard people say, when they
have been talking of money that they could not
get in, ' I wish I had it in a foul clout : ' in truth,
I had mine in a foul clout ; for it was foul, according
to the letter of that saying, but it served me till I came
to a convenient place, and then I sat down and washed
the cloth in the kennel, and so then put my money
in again.

Well, I carried it home with me to my lodging in
the glass-house, and when I went to go to sleep, I
326



DANIEL DEFOE

knew not what to do with it ; if I had let any of
the black crew I was with know of it, I should have
been smothered in the ashes for it, or robbed of it,
or some trick or other put upon me for it ; so I knew
not what to do, but lay with it in my hand, and my
hand in my bosom, but then sleep went from my
eyes. . . Every now and then dropping asleep, I should
dream that my money was lost, and start like one
frighted ; then, finding it fast in my hand, try to go
to sleep again, but could not for a long while, then
drop and start again. At last a fancy came into my
head that if I fell asleep, I should dream of the money
and talk of it in my sleep, and tell that I had money,
which if I should do, and one of the rogues should
hear me, they would pick it out of my bosom, and of
my hand too, without waking me ; and after that
thought I could not sleep a wink more. . . As soon as
it was day, I got out of the hole we lay in, and ram-
bled abroad into the fields towards Stepney, and there
I mused and considered what I should do with this
money, and many a time I wished that I had not
had it ; for, after all my ruminating upon it, and
what course I should take with it, or where I should
put it, I could not hit upon any one thing, or any
possible method to secure it. . . At last it came into
my head, that I would look out for some hole in a
tree, and see to hide it there till I should have occa-
sion for it. Big with this discovery, as I then thought
it, I began to look about me for a tree ; but there
were no trees in the fields about Stepney or Mile-
End, that looked fit for my purpose ; and if there
were any, that I began to look narrowly at, the fields
were so full of people, that they would see if I went
to hide anything there, and I thought the people

327



DANIEL DEFOE



eyed me as it was, and that two men in particular
followed me to see what I intended to do.

This drove me farther off, and I crossed the road
at Mile-End, and in the middle of the town went down
a lane that goes away to the ' Blind Beggars at
Bethnal-Green ; when I came a little way in the lane,
I found a footpath over the fields, and in those fields
several trees for my turn, as I thought ; at last, one
tree had a little hole in it, pretty high out of my reach,
and I climbed up the tree to get to it, and when I
came there, I put my hand in, and found (as I thought)
a place very fit, so I placed my treasure there, and
was mighty well satisfied with it ; but, behold, putting
my hand in again to lay it more commodiously, as
I thought, of a sudden it slipped away from me, and
I found the tree was hollow, and my little parcel was
fallen in quite out of my reach, and how far it might
go in I knew not ; so that, in a word, my money was
quite gone, irrecoverably lost ; there could be no
room so much as to hope ever to see it again, for it
was a vast great tree.

As young as I was, I was now sensible what a fool
I was before, that I could not think of ways to keep my
money, but I must come thus far to throw it into
a hole where I could not reach it. Well, I thrust my
hand quite up to my elbow, but no bottom was to be
found, or any end of the hole or cavity ; I got a stick
off of the tree, and thrust it in a great way, but all was
one ; then I cried, nay, I roared out, I was in such a
passion ; then I got down the tree again, then up again,
and thrust in myhand again till I scratched myarm and
made it bleed, and cried all the while most violently. . .
The last time I had gotten up the tree I happened
to come down not on the same side that I went up
328



DANIEL DEFOE



and came down before, but on the other side of the
tree, and on the other side of the bank also ; and,
behold, the tree had a great open place, in the side of
it close to the ground, as old hollow trees often have ;
and looking into the open place, to my inexpressible
joy, there lay my money and my linen rag, all wrapped
up just as I had put it into the hole ; for the tree
being hollow all the way up, there had been some moss
or light stuff, which I had not judgement enough
to know was not firm, and had given way when it
came to drop out of my hand, and so it had slipped
quite down at once.

I was but a child, and I rejoiced like a child, for
I holloaed quite out aloud when I saw it ; then I run
to it, and snatched it up, hugged and kissed the dirty
rag a hundred times ; then danced and jumped about,
run from one end of the field to the other, and, in
short, I knew not what, much less do I know now what
I did, though I shall never forget the thing, either
what a sinking grief it was to my heart, when I thought
I had lost it, or what a flood of joy overwhelmed me
when I had got it again.

II

Well, I came away with my money, and, having
taken sixpence out of it, before I made it up again,
I went to a chandler's shop in Mile-End, and bought
a half-penny roll and a half-pennyworth of cheese,
and sat down at the door after I bought it, and ate
it very heartily, and begged some beer to drink with
it, which the good woman gave me very freely.

Away I went then for the town, to see if I could
find any of my companions, and resolved I would try
no more hollow trees for my treasure. As I came along

329



DANIEL DEFOE



Whitechapel, I came by a broker's shop, over against the
church, where they sold old clothes, for I had nothing
on but the worst of rags ; so I stopped at the shop,
and stood looking at the clothes which hung at door.

' Well, young gentleman,' says a man that stood at
the door, ' you look wishly ; do you see anything you
like, and will your pocket compass a good coat now,
for you look as if you belonged to the ragged regiment ?'
I was affronted at the fellow. ' What 's that to you,'
said I, ' how ragged I am ? if I had seen anything
I liked, I have money to pay for it ; but I can go where
I shan't be huffed at for looking.'

While I said thus, pretty boldly to the fellow, comes
a woman out, ' What ails you,' says she to the man,
' to bully away our customers so ? a poor boy's money
is as good as my lord mayor's ; if poor people did not
buy old clothes, what would become of our business ?'
and then, turning to me, ' Come hither, child,' says
she, ' if thou hast a mind to anything I have, you
shan't be hectored by him ; the boy is a pretty boy,
I assure you,' says she, to another woman that was by
this time come to her. ' Aye,' says t'other, ' so he is,
a very well-looking child, if he was clean and well
dressed, and may be as good a gentleman's son for
anything we know, as any of those that are well
dressed. Come, my dear,' says she, ' tell me what is it
you would have? ' She pleased me mightily to hear
her talk of my being a gentleman's son, and it brought
former things to mind ; but when she talked of my
being not clean, and in rags, then I cried.

She pressed me to tell her if I saw anything that
I wanted ; I told her no, all the clothes I saw there
were too big for me. ' Come, child,' says she, ' I have
two things here that will fit you, and I am sure you
33°



DANIEL DEFOE

want them both ; that is, first, a little hat, and there,'
says she (tossing it to me), ' I'll give you that for
nothing ; and here is a good warm pair of breeches ;
I dare say,' says she, ' they will fit you ; and they are
very tight and good ; and,' says she, ' if you should
ever come to have so much money that you don't
know what to do with it, here are excellent good
pockets,' says she, ' and a little fob to put your gold
in, or your watch in, when you get it.'

It struck me with a strange kind of joy that I should
have a place to put my money in, and need not go to
hide it again in a hollow tree ; that I was ready to
snatch the breeches out of her hands, and wondered
that I should be such a fool never to think of buying
me a pair of breeches before, that I might have a pocket
to put my money in, and not carry it about two days
together in my hand, and in my shoe, and I knew not
how ; so, in a word, I gave her two shillings for the
breeches, and went over into the churchyard, and put
them on, put my money into my new pockets, and was
as pleased as a prince is with his coach and six horses.

The Ltfe of Colonel Jack

FRANCIS ATTERBURY, BISHOP
OF ROCHESTER

1662-1732

220 To his sick Daughter, about to rejoin
him in his Exile

Montpelier, Sept. 3, 1729.

MY DEAR HEART,
I have so much to say to you, that I can
hardly say any thing to you till I see you. My heart

331



FRANCIS ATTERBURY



is full ; but it is in vain to begin upon paper what I
can never end. I have a thousand desires to see you,
which are checked by a thousand fears lest any ill
accident should happen to you in the journey. God
preserve you in every step of it, and send you safe
hither ! And I will endeavour, by his blessing and
assistance, to send you well back again, and to accom-
pany you in the journey, as far as the law of England
will suffer me. I stay here only to receive and take
care of you (for no other view should have hindered
my coming into the North of France this autumn) ;
and I live only to help towards lengthening your life,
and rendering it, if I can, more agreeable to you :
for I see not of what use I am, or can be, in other
respects. I shall be impatient till I hear you are safely
landed, and as impatient after that till you arc safely
arrived in your winter quarters. God, I hope, will
favour you with good weather, and all manner of good
accidents on the way ; and I will take care, my dear
love, to make you as easy and happy as I can at the
end of your journey.

I have written to Mr. Morice about every thing
I can think of relating to your accommodation on the
road, and shall not therefore repeat any part of it
in this letter, which is intended only to acknowledge
a mistake under which I find myself. I thought
I loved you before as much as I could possibly. But
I feel such new degrees of tenderness arising in me
upon this terrible long journey, as I was never before
acquainted with. God will reward you, I hope, for
your piety to me, which had, I doubt not, its share in
producing this resolution, and will in rewarding you
reward me also ; that being the chief thing I have to
beg of him.
332



BISHOP OF ROCHESTER



Adieu, my dear heart, till I see you ! and till then
satisfy yourself, that, whatever uneasiness your journey
may give you, my expectation of you, and concern
for you, will give me more. I am got to another page,
and must do violence to myself to stop here — But
I will — and abruptly bid you, my dear heart, adieu,
till I bid you welcome to Montpelier.

A line, under your own hand, pray, by the post
that first sets out after you land at Bourdeaux.

Fr. Roffen.
Epistolary Correspondence

MATTHEW PRIOR

1664-1721

221 The Vicar of Uray and Sir Thomas
<£More

1 /f ORE. And yet Vicar, Cicero himself was
J.V1. beheaded as well as I.

Vuar. Why that is just the thing I have often
taken into my consideration, he lost his life when he
forsook his Maxim, to say the truth on't his Case in
some respect was not unlike yours. He had his head
cutt off because he would be running it [too] far into
Affairs, from which he had better to have receeded.
He spoke so violently against Anthony that he could
never hope in Prudence to be forgiven by Him, tho
Anthony had good Nature enough, and you contra-
dicted Henry, who as to his temper was inflexible, and
in his Anger never forgave any Man.

More. But did not Anthony deserve that and more
from Cicero f And as to my Case, if the King —

V tear. Alas, Sir, let People deserve or not deserve,

333



MATTHEW PRIOR



that is not six pence matter. Have they power or
have they not ? There 's the Question. If they have,
never provoke them ; let me tell you, my late Lord
Chancellor, as there are an Hundred old Womens
Receipts of more real use than any that the Physitians
can prescribe ; by which the Vulgar live, while the
Learned laugh at them : there are as many common
rules by which we Ordinary People are directed,
which you wise Men (as you think your selves) either
do not know, or at least never Practice ; if You did it
would be better for You. . . .

More. But what did you think was your Business
in the World, for what Cause did You live ?

V tear. Why to teach my Parish and to receive
my Tythes.

More. Oh, as to receiving your Tythes I have no
Scruple, but what did you teach your Parish ?
Vicar. What a Question is That, Why Religion.
More. What Religion?

Vicar. Again, sometimes the Antient Roman
Catholick, some times that of the Reformed Church
of England.

More. How came you to teach them the first ?

Vicar. Why my Canonical Obedience, the order of
my Diocessan Bishop, the Missal and Breviary all
enjoyned it.

More. How happened it then you taught the t'other ?

V tear. Why New Acts of Parliament were made for
the Reformation of Popery. My Bishop was put into
the Tower for Disobeying them, and our Missals and
Breviarys were burnt. You are not going to Catachise
me, Are you f

More. And You continued stil in your Vicarage
of Bray ?

334



MATTHEW PRIOR



Vicar. Where would you have had me been? in
Foxes Book of Martyrs ?

More. Soft and fair, Vicar, only one word more.
Did you make all those leaps and Changes without any
previous Examination, as to the Essential good or ill
of them?

Vicar. Why, what should I have done ? The King
had a mind to fall out with the Pope. Would you have
a single Man oppose either of these mighty Potentates ?
His Highness upon the Quarrel bids me read the Mass
in English, and I do so. His Son Edward enjoins the
same thing, and I continue my Obedience. Queen
Mary is [in] Communion with the Church of Rome,
and She commands me to turn my English Mass again
into Latin. Why then things are just as they were
when first I took Orders. Elizabeth will have it
Translated back into English. Why then matters
stand as they did when I first reformed. You see, Sir,
it was the Opinion of the Church of which I was
a Member, that Changed, but the Vicar of Bray
remained always the same Man.

Dialogues of the Dead

JOHN ARBUTHNOT

1667-1735

222 The Christening of ^Martin Scriblerus

THE day of the Christening being come, and the
house filled with Gossips, the Levity of whose
Conversation suited but ill with the Gravity of Dr.
Cornelius, he cast about how to pass this day more
agreeably to his Character ; that is to say, not without
some Profitable Conference, nor wholly without obser-
vance of some Ancient Custom.



335



JOHN ARBUTHNOT

He remembered to have read in Theocritus, that the
Cradle of Hercules was a Shield ; and being possessed
of an antique Buckler, which he held as a most inestim-
able Relick, he determined to have the infant laid
therein, and in that manner brought into the Study,
to be shown to certain learned men of his acquaintance.

The regard he had for this Shield had caused him
formerly to compile a Dissertation concerning it,
proving from the several properties, and particularly
the colour of the Rust, the exact chronology thereof.

With this Treatise, and a moderate supper, he pro-
posed to entertain his Guests ; though he had also
another design, to have their assistance in the calcula-
tion of his Son's Nativity.

He therefore took the Buckler out of a Case (in
which he always kept it, lest it might contract any
modern rust), and entrusted it to his House-maid, with
orders that, when the company was come, she should
lay the Child carefully in it, covered with a mantle of
blue Satin.

The Guests were no sooner seated, but they entered
into a warm Debate about the Triclinium, and the
manner of Decubitus of the Ancients, which Cornelius
broke off in this manner : —

' This day, my Friends, I purpose to exhibit my son
before you ; a Child not wholly unworthy of Inspec-
tion, as he is descended from a Race of Virtuosi. Let
the Physiognomists examine his features ; let the
Chirographists behold his Palm ; but above all, let us
consult for the calculation of his Nativity. To this
end, as the child is not vulgar, I will not present him
unto you in a vulgar manner. He shall be cradled in
my Ancient Shield, so famous through the Universities
of Europe. You all know how I purchased that
336



JOHN ARBUTHNOT

invaluable piece of Antiquity, at the great (though
indeed inadequate) expence of all the Plate of our
family, how happily I carried it off, and how trium-
phantly I transported it hither, to the inexpressible
grief of all Germany. Happy in every circumstance,
but that it broke the heart of the great Melchior
Insipidus ! '

Here he stopped his Speech, upon the sight of the
Maid, who entered the room with the Child ; He took
it in his arms, and proceeded.

' Behold then my Child, but first behold the Shield ;
Behold this Rust, — or rather let me call it this precious
^Erugo, — behold this beautiful Varnish of Time, —
this venerable Verdure of so many Ages — '

In speaking these words, he slowly lifted up the
Mantle which covered it, inch by inch ; but at every
inch he uncovered his cheeks grew paler, his hand
trembled, his nerves failed, till on sight of the whole,
the Tremor became universal ; the Shield and the
Infant both dropped to the ground, and he had only
strength enough to cry out, ' O God ! my Shield, my
Shield ! '

The Truth was, the Maid (extreamly concerned for
the reputation of her own cleanliness, and her young
master's honour) had scoured it as clean as her Andirons.

Cornelius sunk back on a chair, the guests stood
astonished, the infant squawled, the maid ran in,
snatched it up again in her arms, flew into her mistress's
room, and told what had happened. Down stairs in
an instant hurried all the Gossips, where they found
the Doctor in a Trance. . . .

As soon as Cornelius awaked, he raised himself on
his elbow, and casting his eye on Mrs. Scriblerus, spoke
as follows : ' Wisely was it said by Homer, that in the

337



JOHN ARBUTHNOT

Cellar of Jupiter are two barrels, the one of good, the
other of evil, which he never bestows on mortals
separately, but constantly mingles them together.
Thus at the same time hath Heaven blessed me with
the birth of a Son, and afflicted me with the scouring
of my Shield. Yet let us not repine at his Dispensa-
tions, who gives and who takes away ; but rather join
in prayer, that the Rust of Antiquity which he hath
been pleased to take from my Shield may be added to
my Son ; and that so much of it as it is my purpose he
shall contract in his Education may never be destroyed
by any Modern Polishing.'

Memoirs of Martin Scnblerus

JONATHAN SWIFT

1667-1745

223 Stella goes "Riding

NOW, madam Stella, what say you ? you ride
every day ; I know that already, sirrah ; and if
you ride every day for a twelvemonth, you would be
still better and better. No, I hope Parvisol will not
have the impudence to make you stay an hour for the
money ; if he does, I'll un-Parvisol him ; pray let
me know. O Lord, how hasty we are ; Stella can't
stay writing and writing ; she must ride and go
a cockhorse, pray now. Well, but the horses are not
come to the door ; the fellow can't find the bridle ;
your stirrup is broken ; where did you put the whips,
Dingley ? Marget, where have you laid Mrs. Johnson's
riband to tie about her f reach me my mask : sup up
this before you go. So, so, a gallop, a gallop : sit fast,
sirrah, and don't ride hard upon the stones. Well, now
Stella is gone, tell me, Dingley, is she a good girl ? and
338



JONATHAN SWIFT

what news is that you are to tell me ? . . . O madam
Stella, welcome home; was it pleasant riding I did
your horse stumble ? how often did the man light to
settle your stirrup ? ride nine miles ? faith, you have
galloped indeed. Well, but where 's the fine thing
you promised me ? I have been a good boy, ask
Dingley else. I believe you did not meet the fine-
thing-man : faith, you are a cheat. So you'll see
Raymond and his wife in town. Faith, that riding to
Laracor gives me short sighs, as well as you. All the
days I have passed here, have been dirt to those. I
have been gaining enemies by the score, and friends
by the couples ; which is against the rules of wisdom,
because they say one enemy can do more hurt than
ten friends can do good. But I have had my revenge
at least, if I get nothing else. And so let fate govern.

Journal to Stella

224 <iA Standard j or English

IF it were not for the Bible and Common Prayer
Book in the Vulgar Tongue, we should hardly be
able to understand anything that was written among
us an hundred years ago ; which is certainly true : for
those books, being perpetually read in Churches, have
proved a kind of standard for language, especially
to the common people. And I doubt whether the
alterations since introduced have added much to the
beauty or strength of the English Tongue, though they
have taken off a great deal from that Simplicity which
is one of the greatest perfections in any language.
You, my Lord, who are so conversant in the sacred
writings, and so great a judge of them in their originals,
will agree, that no Translation our Country ever yet

339



JONATHAN SWIFT

produced, has come up to that of the Old and New
Testament : And by the many beautiful passages
which I have often had the honour to hear your Lord-
ship cite from thence, I am persuaded that the
Translators of the Bible were Masters of an English
style much fitter for that work than any we see in
our present writings ; which I take to be owing to
the Simplicity that runs through the whole. Then,
as to the greatest part of our Liturgy, compiled long
before the Translation of the Bible now in use, and
little altered since, there seem to be in it as great strains
of true sublime eloquence as are anywhere to be found
in our language ; which every man of good Taste will
observe in the Communion Service, that of Burial, and
other parts.

Letter Dedicatory to the Earl of Oxford

22 5 Qullher Captures the Fleet of
jB/efuscu

THE Empire of Blefuscu is an Island situated to
the North North-East side of Lilliput, from whence
it is parted only by a Channel of eight hundred Yards
wide. I had not yet seen it, and upon this Notice
of an intended Invasion, I avoided appearing on that
side of the Coast, for fear of being discovered by some
of the Enemy's Ships, who had received no Intelligence
of me, all Intercourse between the two Empires having
been strictly forbidden during the War, upon pain of
Death, and an Embargo laid by our Emperor upon all
Vessels whatsoever. I communicated to his Majesty
a Project I had formed of seizing the Enemy's whole
Fleet : which, as our Scouts assured us, lay at Anchor

34°



JONATHAN SWIFT



in the Harbour ready to sail with the first fair Wind.
I consulted the most experienced Seamen, upon the
depth of the Channel, which they had often plumbed,
who told me, that in the middle at high Water it was
seventy Glumgluffs deep, which is about six foot of
European Measure ; and the rest of it fifty Glumgluffs
at most. I walked towards the North-East Coast over
against Blefuscu ; and lying down behind a Hillock,
took out my small Pocket Perspective-Glass, and
viewed the Enemy's Fleet at Anchor, consisting of
about fifty Men of War, and a great Number of
Transports : I then came back to my House, and gave
Order (for which I had a Warrant) for a great Quantity
of the strongest Cable and Bars of Iron. The Cable
was about as thick as Packthread, and the Bars of the
length and size of a Knitting-Needle. I trebled the
Cable to make it stronger, and for the same reason
I twisted three of the Iron Bars together, binding
the Extremities into a Hook. Having thus fixed fifty
Hooks to as many Cables, I went back to the North-
East Coast, and putting off my Coat, Shoes, and
Stockings, walked into the Sea in my Leathern Jerkin,
about half an hour before high Water. I waded with
what Haste I could, and swam in the middle about
thirty Yards till I felt ground ; I arrived at the Fleet
in less than half an hour. The Enemy was so frighted
when they saw me, that they leaped out of their Ships,
and swam to shore, where there could not be fewer
than thirty thousand Souls. I then took my Tackling,
and fastening a Hook to the hole at the Prow of each,
I tied all the Cords together at the End. While I was
thus employed, the Enemy discharged several thousand
Arrows, many of which stuck in my Hands and
Face ; and besides the excessive smart, gave me much



341



JONATHAN SWIFT

disturbance in my Work. My greatest Apprehension
was for my Eyes, which I should have infallibly lost, if
I had not suddenly thought of an Expedient. I kept
among other little Necessaries a pair of Spectacles in
a private Pocket, which, as I observed before, had
scaped the Emperor's Searchers. These I took out and
fastened as strongly as I could upon my Nose, and thus
armed went on boldly with my Work in spite of the
Enemy's Arrows, many of which struck against the
Glasses of my Spectacles, but without any other
Effect, further than a little to discompose them. I
had now fastened all the Hooks, and taking the Knot
in my Hand, began to pull ; but not a Ship would
stir, for they were all too fast held by their Anchors,
so that the boldest part of my Enterprise remained.
I therefore let go the Cord, and leaving the Hooks
fixed to the Ships, I resolutely cut with my Knife the
Cables that fastened the Anchors, receiving above two
hundred Shots in my Face and Hands ; then I took
up the knotted End of the Cables, to which my Hooks
were tied, and with great ease drew fifty of the Enemy's
largest Men of War after me.

The Blefuscudians, who had not the least Imagina-
tion of what I intended, were at first confounded with
Astonishment. They had seen me cut the Cables, and
thought my Design was only to let the Ships run
a-dnft, or fall foul on each other : but when they
perceived the whole Fleet moving in Order, and saw
me pulling at the End, they set up such a scream of
Grief and Despair that it is almost impossible to
describe or conceive. When I had got out of danger,
I stopped awhile to pick out the Arrows that stuck in
my Hands and Face ; and rubbed on some of the same
Oincment that was given me at my first arrival, as
342



JONATHAN SWIFT

I have formerly mentioned. I then took off my
Spectacles, and waiting about an Hour, till the Tide
was a little fallen, I waded through the middle with
my Cargo, and arrived safe at the Royal Port of
Lilhput.

A Voyage to Lilhput

226 The aAcademy of ^Projectors

I WAS received very kindly by the Warden, and went
for many Days to the Academy. Every Room hath
in it one or more Projectors, and I believe I could not
be in fewer than five Hundred Rooms.

The first Man I saw was of a meagre Aspect, with
sooty Hands and Face, his Hair and Beard long, ragged
and singed in several places. His Clothes, Shirt, and
Skin, were all of the same Colour. He had been eight
Years upon a Project for extracting Sun-Beams out of
Cucumbers, which were to be put into Vials hermeti-
cally Sealed, and let out to warm the Air in raw incle-
ment Summers. He told me, he did not doubt, in
eight Years more, he should be able to supply the
Governor's Gardens with Sunshine at a reasonable
Rate ; but he complained that his Stock was low, and
entreated me to give him something as an Encourage-
ment to Ingenuity, especially since this had been a very
dear Season for Cucumbers. I made him a small
Present, for my Lord had furnished me with Money
on purpose, because he knew their Practice of begging
from all who go to see them.

A Voyage to Laputa



343



JONATHAN SWIFT



227 <*A Dedication to '•Prince ^Posterity

I PROFESS to Tour Highness, in the Integrity of my
Heart, that what I am going to say is literally true
this Minute I am writing ; What Revolutions may
happen before it shall be ready for your Perusal, I can
by no means warrant ; However I beg You to accept
it as a Specimen of our Learning, our Politeness and
our Wit. I do therefore affirm upon the Word of
a sincere Man, that there is now actually in being,
a certain Poet called John Dryden, whose Translation
of Virgil was lately printed in a large Folio, well
bound, and if diligent search were made, for ought
I know, is yet to be seen. There is another call'd
Nahum late, who is ready to make Oath that he has
caused many Rheams of Verse to be published, whereof
both himself and his Bookseller (if lawfully required)
can still produce authentick Copies, and therefore
wonders why the World is pleased to make such a
Secret of it. There is a Third, known by the Name
of Tom Durfey, a Poet of a vast Comprehension, an
universal Genius, and most profound Learning. There
are also one Mr. Rymer, and one Mr. Dennis, most
profound Criticks. There is a Person styl'd Dr.
B-tl-y, who has wrote near a thousand Pages of
immense Erudition, giving a full and true Account of
a certain Squable of wonderful Importance between
himself and a Bookseller : He is a Writer of Infinite
Wit and Humour ; no Man raillyes with a better
Grace, and in more sprightly Turns. Farther, I avow
to Tour Highness, that with these Eyes I have beheld
the Person of William W-tt-n, B.D. who has written
a good sizeable Volume against a Friend of Tour
344



JONATHAN SWIFT



Governor (from whom, alas ! he must therefore look for
little Favour) in a most gentlemanly Style, adorned
with utmost Politeness and Civility ; replete with
Discoveries equally valuable for their Novelty and
Use : and embellish'd with Traits of Wit so poignant
and so apposite, that he is a worthy Yokemate to his
foremention'd Friend. The Tale of a Tub

JOSEPH ADDISON

1672-1719

228 ^Mr. Shapely

' TkATR. SPECTATOR,

£ Vx Now, Sir, the thing is this : Mr. Shapely
is the prettiest Gentleman about Town. He is very
tall, but not too tall neither. He dances like an Angel.
His Mouth is made I don't know how, but 'tis the
prettiest that I ever saw in my Life. He is always
laughing, for he has an infinite deal of Wit. If you
did but see how he rolls his Stockings ! He has a
thousand pretty Fancies, and I am sure, if you saw him,
you would like him. He is a very good Scholar, and
can talk Latin as fast as English. I wish you could but
see him dance. Now you must understand poor
Mr. Shapely has no Estate ; but how can he help that,
you know } And yet my Friends are so unreasonable
as to be always teazing me about him, because he has
no Estate. But, I am sure, he has that that is better
than an Estate ; for he is a Good-natured, Ingenious,
Modest, Civil, Tall, Well-bred, handsome Man, and
I am obliged to him for his Civilities ever since I saw
him. I forgot to tell you that he has black Eyes, and
looks upon me now and then as if he had Tears in

1 Your Governor) \ e Time

345



JOSEPH ADDISON



them. And yet my Friends are so unreasonable, that
they would have me be uncivil to him. I have a good
Portion which they cannot hinder me of, and I shall
be Fourteen on the 29th Day of August next, and am
therefore willing to settle in the World as soon as
I can, and so is Mr. Shapely. But every Body I advise
with here is poor Mr. Shapely's Enemy. I desire
therefore you will give me your Advice, for I know
you are a wise Man, and if you advise me well, I am
resolved to follow it. I heartily wish you could see
him dance, and am,

SIR,

Tour most humble Servant,
B. D.

He loves your Spectators mightily.'

The Spectator, No. 475

229 Will Wimble

AS I was Yesterday Morning walking with Sir
i\ Roger before his House, a Country-Fellow
brought him a huge Fish, which, he told him, Mr.
William Wimble had caught that very Morning ; and
that he presented it, with his Service, to him, and
intended to come and dine with him. At the same
Time he delivered a Letter, which my Friend read
to me as soon as the Messenger left him.

' Sir Roger,

I Desire you to accept of a Jack, which is the best
I have caught this Season. I intend to come and stay
with you a Week, and see how the Perch bite in the
Black River. I observed, with some Concern, the last
Time I saw you upon the Bowling-Green, that your
Whip wanted a Lash to it : I will bring half a Dozen
346



JOSEPH ADDISON

with me that I twisted last Week, which I hope will
serve you all the Time you are in the Country. I
have not been out of the Saddle for six Days last past,
having been at Eaton with Sir Johnh eldest Son. He
takes to his Learning hugely. I am,
SIR,

Tour humble Servant,

Will. Wimble.'

This extraordinary Letter, and Message that
accompanied it, made me very curious to know the
Character and Quality of the Gentleman who sent
them ; which I found to be as follows ; Will. Wimble
is younger Brother to a Baronet, and descended of the
ancient Family of the Wimbles. He is now between
Forty and Fifty ; but being bred to no Business and
born to no Estate, he generally lives with his elder
Brother as Superintendant of his Game. He hunts
a Pack of Dogs better than any Man in the Country,
and is very famous for finding out a Hare. He is
extremely well versed in all the little Handicrafts of
an idle Man : He makes a May-Ry to a Miracle ; and
furnishes the whole Country with Angle-Rods. As
he is a good-natur'd officious Fellow, and very much
esteemed upon Account of his Family, he is a welcome
Guest at every House, and keeps up a good Correspon-
dence among all the Gentlemen about him. He carries
a Tulip-Root in his Pocket from one to another, or
exchanges a Puppy between a couple of Friends that
live perhaps in the opposite Sides of the County.
Will, is a particular Favourite of all the young Heirs,
whom he frequently obliges with a Net that he has
weaved, or a Setting-dog that he has made himself :
He now and then presents a Pair of Garters of his

347



JOSEPH ADDISON

own knitting to their Mothers or Sisters ; and raises
a great deal of Mirth among them, by enquiring as
often as he meets them how they wear ? These
Gentlemen-like Manufactures and obliging little
Humours, make Will, the Darling of the Country.

The Spectator, No 108

230 Sir ^Roger at Qhurch

I AM always very well pleased with a Country
Sunday ; and think, if keeping holy the Seventh
Day were only a human Institution, it would be the
best Method that could have been thought of for the
polishing and civilizing of Mankind. It is certain the
Country-People would soon degenerate into a kind of
Savages and Barbarians, were there not such frequent
Returns of a stated Time, in which the whole Village
meet together with their best Faces, and in their
cleanliest Habits, to converse with one another upon
indifferent Subjects, hear their Duties explained to
them, and join together in Adoration of the Supreme
Being. Sunday clears away the Rust of the whole Week,
not only as it refreshes in their Minds the Notions
of Religion, but as it puts both the Sexes upon appear-
ing in their most agreeable Forms, and exerting all
such Qualities as are apt to give them a Figure in the
Eye of the Village. A Country-Fellow distinguishes
himself as much in the Church-yard, as a Citizen does
upon the Change ; the whole Parish-Politicks being
generally discuss'd in that Place either after Sermon
or before the Bell rings.

My Friend Sir Roger being a good Church-man,
has beautified the Inside of his Church with several
Texts of his own chusing : He has likewise given
348



JOSEPH ADDISON

a handsome Pulpit-Cloth, and railed in the Com-
munion-Table at his own Expence. He has often told
me, that at his coming to his Estate he found his
Parishioners very irregular ; and that in order to
make them kneel and join in the Responses, he gave
every one of them a Hassock and a Common-prayer
Book : and at the same Time employed an itinerant
Singing-Master, who goes about the Country for that
Purpose, to instruct them rightly in the Tunes of the
Psalms ; upon which they now very much value
themselves, and indeed out-do most of the Country
Churches that I have ever heard.

As Sir Roger is Landlord to the whole Congregation,
he keeps them in very good Order, and will suffer no
Body to sleep in it besides himself ; for if by Chance
he has been surprized into a short Nap at Sermon,
upon recovering out of it he stands up and looks
about him, and if he sees any Body else nodding, either
wakes them himself, or sends his Servants to them.
Several other of the old Knight's Particularities break
out upon these Occasions : Sometimes he will be
lengthening out a Verse in the Singing-Psalms, half
a Minute after the rest of the Congregation have done
with it ; sometimes, when he is pleased with the
Matter of his Devotion, he pronounces Amen three or
four times to the same Prayer ; and sometimes stands up
when every Body else is upon their Knees, to count the
Congregation, or see if any of his Tenants are missing.

I was Yesterday very much surprized to hear my
old Friend, in the Midst of the Service, calling out
to one John Matthews to mind what he was about,
and not disturb the Congregation. This John
Matthews it seems is remarkable for being an idle
Fellow, and at that Time was kicking his Heels for

349



JOSEPH ADDISON

his Diversion. This Authority of the Knight, though
exerted in that odd Manner which accompanies him
in all Circumstances of Life, has a very good Effect
upon the Parish, who are not polite enough to see
any thing ridiculous in his Behaviour ; besides that,
the general good Sense and Worthiness of his Character,
make his Friends observe these little Singularities as
Foils that rather set off than blemish his good Qualities.

As soon as the Sermon is finished, no Body presumes
to stir till Sir Roger is gone out of the Church. The
Knight walks down from his Seat in the Chancel
between a double Row of his Tenants, that stand
bowing to him on each Side ; and every now and then
enquires how such an one's Wife, or Mother, or Son,
or Father do whom he does not see at Church ; which
is understood as a secret Reprimand to the Person
that is absent.

The Spectator, No 112

231 Sir <r Roger goes to Spring (garden

AS I was sitting in my Chamber, and thinking on
jfjL a Subject for my next Spectator, I heard two or
three irregular Bounces at my Landlady's Door, and
upon the opening of it, a loud chearful Voice enquiring
whether the Philosopher was at home. The Child
who went to the Door answered very innocently, that
he did not lodge there. I immediately recollected
that it was my good Friend Sir Roger's Voice : and
that I had promised to go with him on the Water to
Spring-Garden, in case it proved a good Evening. The
Knight put me in mind of my Promise from the
bottom of the Stair-Case, but told me that if I was
speculating he would stay below till I had done.

35°



JOSEPH ADDISON

Upon my coming down I found all the Children of
the Family got about my old Friend, and my Landlady
herself, who is a notable prating Gossip, engaged in
a Conference with him, being mightily pleased with
his stroakmg her little Boy upon the Head, and
bidding him be a good Child, and mind his Book.

We were no sooner come to the Temple Stairs, but
we were surrounded with a crowd of Water-men,
offering us their respective Services. Sir Roger, after
having looked about him very attentively, spied one
with a Wooden-Leg, and immediately gave him Orders
to get his Boat ready. As we were walking towards it,
You must know, says Sir Roger, I never make use of
any Body to row me that has not either lost a Leg or an
Arm. I wou'd rather hate him a few Strokes of his
Oar, than not employ an honest Man that has been
wounded in the Queen's Service. If 1 was a Lord or
a Bishop, and kept a Barge, I would not put a Fellow
in my Livery that had not a W ooden-Leg.

My old Friend, after having seated himself, and
trimmed the Boat with his Coachman, who, being
a very sober Man, always serves for Ballast on these
Occasions, we made the best of our way for Fox-Hall.
Sir Roger obliged the Waterman to give us the History
of his right Leg, and hearing that he had left it at
La Hogue, with many Particulars which passed in that
glorious Action, the Knight in the Triumph of his
Heart made several Reflections on the Greatness of
the British Nation ; as, that one Englishman could beat
three Frenchmen ; that we cou'd never be in Danger
of Popery so long as we took care of our Fleet ; that
the Thames was the noblest River in Europe ; that
London-Bridge was a greater Piece of Work than any
of the seven Wonders of the World ; with many

35i



JOSEPH ADDISON

other honest Prejudices which naturally cleave to the
Heart of a true Englishman.

After some short Pause, the old Knight turning
about his Head twice or thrice, to take a Survey of
this great Metropolis, bid me observe how thick the
City was set with Churches, and that there was scarce
a single Steeple on this side Temple-Bar. A most
Heathenish Sight ! says Sir Roger : There is no
Religion at this End of the Town. The fifty new
Churches will very much mend the Prospect ; but
Church-work is slow, Church-work is slow !. .

We were now arrived at Spring-Garden, which is
exquisitely pleasant at this time of the Year. When
I considered the Fragrancy of the Walks and Bowers,
with the Choirs of Birds that sung upon the Trees,
and the loose Tribe of People that walk'd under their
Shades, I could not but look upon the Place as a kind
of Mahometan Paradise. , Sir Roger told me it put
him in mind of a little Coppice by his House in the
Country, which his Chaplain used to call an Aviary
of Nightingales. You must understand, says the
Knight, there is nothing in the World that pleases a Man
in Love so much as your Nightingale. Ah, Mr. Spec-
tator ! The many Moonlight Nights that I have
walked by my self, and thought on the Widow by the
Mustek of the Nightingale ! Here he fetch'd a deep
Sigh, and was falling into a Fit of musing, when
a Mask, who came behind him, gave him a gentle
Tap upon the Shoulder, and asked him if he would
drink a Bottle of Mead with her ? But the Knight
being startled at so unexpected a Familiarity, and
displeased to be interrupted in his Thoughts of the
Widow, told her, She was a wanton Baggage, and bid
her go about her Business.



JOSEPH ADDISON



We concluded our Walk with a Glass of Burton-
Ale, and a Slice of Hung-Beef. When we had done
eating our selves, the Knight called a Waiter to him,
and bid him carry the remainder to the Waterman
that had but one Leg. I perceived the Fellow stared
upon him at the oddness of the Message, and was going
to be saucy ; upon which I ratified the Knight's
Commands with a peremptory Look.

As we were going out of the Garden, my old Friend
thinking himself obliged, as a Member of the Quorum,
to animadvert upon the Morals of the Place, told the
Mistress of the House, who sat at the Bar, That he
should be a better Customer to her Garden, if there
were more Nightingales, and fewer Strumpets.

The Spectator, No 383

232 The < \Royal Exchange

THERE is no Place in the Town which I so much
love to frequent as the Royal Exchange. It gives
me a secret Satisfaction, and, in some measure, gratifies
my Vanity, as I am an Englishman, to see so rich an
Assembly of Country-men and Foreigners consulting
together upon the private Business of Mankind, and
making this Metropolis a kind of Emporium for the
whole Earth. I must confess I look upon High-
Change to be a great Council, in which all considerable
Nations have their Representatives. Factors in the
Trading World are what Ambassadors are in the
Politick World ; they negotiate Affairs, conclude
Treaties, and maintain a good Correspondence between
those wealthy Societies of Men that are divided from
one another by Seas and Oceans, or live on the different
Extremities of a Continent. I have often been pleased
to hear Disputes adjusted between an Inhabitant of

2830 N 353



JOSEPH ADDISON

Japan and an Alderman of London, or to see a Subject
of the Great Mogul entering into a League with one of
the Czar of Muscovy. I am infinitely delighted in
mixing with these several Ministers of Commerce, as
they are distinguished by their different Walks and
different Languages : Sometimes I am justled among
a Body of Armenians : Sometimes I am lost in a Crowd
of Jews ; and sometimes make one in a Groupe of
Dutch-men. I am a Dane, Swede, or Frenchman at
different times ; or rather fancy my self like the old
Philosopher, who upon being asked what Countryman
he was, replied, That he was a Citizen of the World. . .

Nature seems to have taken a particular Care to
disseminate her Blessings among the different Regions
of the World, with an Eye to this mutual Intercourse
and Traffick among Mankind, that the Natives of the
several Parts of the Globe might have a kind of
Dependance upon one another, and be united together
by their common Interest. Almost every Degree
produces something peculiar to it. The Food often
grows in one Country, and the Sauce in another.
The Fruits of Portugal are corrected by the Products
of Barhadoes : The Infusion of a China Plant sweetned
with the Pith of an Indian Cane. The Phihppuk
Islands give a Flavour to our European Bowls. The
single Dress of a Woman of Quality is often the Product
of an Hundred Climates. The Muff and the Fan
come together from the different Ends of the Earth.
The Scarf is sent from the Torrid Zone, and the Tippet
from beneath the Pole. The Brocade Petticoat rises
out of the Mines of Peru, and the Diamond Necklace
out of the Bowels of Indostan. . .

Our Ships are laden with the Harvest of every
Climate : Our Tables are stored with Spices, and Oils,
354



JOSEPH ADDISON

and Wines : Our Rooms are filled with Pyramids
of China, and adorned with the Workmanship of
Japan : Our Morning's-Draught comes to us from
the remotest Corners of the Earth : We repair our
Bodies by the Drugs of America, and repose our selves
under Indian Canopies. . .

For these Reasons there are not more useful Members
in a Commonwealth than Merchants. They knit
Mankind together in a mutual Intercourse of good
Offices, distribute the Gifts of Nature, find Work for
the Poor, add Wealth to the Rich, and Magnificence
to the Great. Our English Merchant converts the
Tin of his own Country into Gold, and exchanges his
Wooll for Rubies. The Mahometans are cloathed in
our British Manufacture, and the Inhabitants of the
Frozen Zone warmed with the Fleeces of our Sheep.

When I have been upon the 'Change, I have often
fancied one of our old Kings standing in Person, where
he is represented in Effigy, and looking down upon the
wealthy Concourse of People with which that Place is
every Day filled. In this Case, how would he be sur-
prized to hear all the Languages of Europe spoken in
this little spot of his former Dominions, and to see so
many private Men, who in his Time would have been
the Vassals of some powerful Baron, Negotiating like
Princes for greater Sums of Money than were formerly
to be met with in the Royal Treasury ! Trade, without
enlarging the British Territories, has given us a kind
of additional Empire : It has multiplied the Number
of the Rich, made our Landed Estates infinitely more
Valuable than they were formerly, and added to them
an Accession of other Estates as Valuable as the Lands
themselves.

The Spectator, No. 69



355



JOSEPH ADDISON



233



Westminster aAbbey



HEN I am in a serious Humour, I very often



the Gloominess of the Place, and the Use to which
it is applied, with the Solemnity of the Building,
and the Condition of the People who lye in it, are
apt to fill the Mind with a kind of Melancholy, or
rather Thoughtfulness, that is not disagreeable. . .

For my own part, though I am always serious, I do
not know what it is to be melancholy ; and can there-
fore take a View of Nature in her deep and solemn
Scenes, with the same Pleasure as in her most gay and
delightful ones. By this means I can improve my self
with those Objects, which others consider with Terror.
When I look upon the Tombs of the Great, every
Emotion of Envy dies in me ; when I read the
Epitaphs of the Beautiful, every inordinate Desire
goes out ; when I meet with the Grief of Parents
upon a Tomb-stone, my Heart melts with Compassion ;
when I see the Tomb of the Parents themselves, I
consider the Vanity of grieving for those whom we must
quickly follow : When I see Kings lying by those who
deposed them, when I consider rival Wits placed Side
by Side, or the holy Men that divided the World
with their Contests and Disputes, I reflect with Sorrow
and Astonishment on the little Competitions, Factions,
and Debates of Mankind. When I read the several
Dates of the Tombs of some that died Yesterday, and
some six hundred Years ago, I consider that great Day
when we shall all of us be Contemporaries, and make
our Appearance together.




W estminster Abbey ; where



The Spectator, No. 26



356



JOSEPH ADDISON



234 The Vision of ^Mirza

HE then led me to the highest Pinnacle of the Rock,
and placing me on the Top of it, Cast thy Eyes
Eastward, said he, and tell me what thou seest. I see,
said I, a huge Valley and a prodigious Tide of Water
rolling through it. The Valley that thou seest, said
he, is the Vale of Misery, and the Tide of Water that
thou seest is part of the great Tide of Eternity. What
is the Reason, said I, that the Tide I see rises out of
a thick Mist at one End, and again loses it self in a
thick Mist at the other ? What thou seest, said he, is
that Portion of Eternity which is called Time, measured
out by the Sun, and reaching from the Beginning
of the World to its Consummation. Examine now,
said he, this Sea that is thus bounded with Darkness at
both Ends, and tell me what thou discoverest in it.
I see a Bridge, said I, standing in the Midst of the
Tide. The Bridge thou seest, said he, is humane Life ;
consider it attentively. Upon a more leisurely Survey
of it, I found that it consisted of threescore and ten
entire Arches, with several broken Arches, which added
to those that were entire, made up the Number about
an hundred. As I was counting the Arches, the
Genius told me that this Bridge consisted at first
of a thousand Arches ; but that a great Flood swept
away the rest, and left the Bridge in the ruinous
Condition I now beheld it. But tell me further, said
he, what thou discoverest on it. I see Multitudes of
People passing over it, said I, and a black Cloud hanging
on each End of it. As I looked more attentively, I saw
several of the Passengers dropping thro' the Bridge,
into the great Tide that flowed underneath it ; and
upon further Examination, perceived there were

357



JOSEPH ADDISON



innumerable Trap-doors that lay concealed in the
Bridge, which the Passengers no sooner trod upon, but
they fell through them into the Tide and immediately
disappeared. These hidden Pit-falls were set very
thick at the Entrance of the Bridge, so that Throngs
of People no sooner broke through the Cloud, but
many of them fell into them. They grew thinner
towards the Middle, but multiplied and lay closer
together towards the End of the Arches that were
entire. The Spectator, No. 159

235 £My Cjarden

< QIR,

O Having lately read your Essay on the Pleasures
of the Imagination, I was so taken with your Thoughts
upon some of our English Gardens, that I cannot
forbear troubling you with a Letter upon that Subject.
I am one, you must know, who am looked upon as
a Humorist in Gardening. I have several Acres about
my House, which I call my Garden, and which
a skillful Gardener would not know what to call. It
is a Confusion of Kitchen and Parterre, Orchard and
Flower Garden, which lie so mixt and interwoven with
one another, that if a Foreigner who had seen nothing
of our Country should be conveyed into my Garden
at his first landing, he would look upon it as a natural
Wilderness, and one of the uncultivated Parts of our
Country. My Flowers grow up in several Parts of the
Garden in the greatest Luxuriancy and Profusion. I
am so far from being fond of any particular one, by
reason of its Rarity, that if I meet with any one in
a Field which pleases me, I give it a Place in my Garden.
By this Means, when a Stranger walks with me, he is
surprized to see several large Spots of Ground covered
with ten thousand different Colours, and has often
358



JOSEPH ADDISON

singled out Flowers that he might have met with
under a common Hedge, in a Field, or in a Meadow,
as some of the greatest Beauties of the Place. The
only Method I observe in this Particular, is to range
in the same Quarter the Products of the same Season,
that they may make their Appearance together, and
compose a Picture of the greatest Variety. There is
the same Irregularity in my Plantations, which run
into as great a Wildness as their Natures will permit.
I take in none that do not naturally rejoyce in the
Soil, and am pleased when I am walking in a Labyrinth
of my own raising, not to know whether the next
Tree I shall meet with is an Apple or an Oak, an Elm
or a Pear-tree. My Kitchen has likewise its particular
Quarters assigned it ; for besides the wholsome
Luxury which that Place abounds with, I have always
thought a Kitchen-garden a more pleasant Sight than
the finest Orangene, or artificial Green-house. I love
to see every thing in its perfection, and am more
pleased to survey my Rows of Coleworts and Cabbages,
with a thousand nameless Pot-herbs, springing up in
their full Fragrancy and Verdure, than to see the
tender Plants of Foreign Countries kept alive by
artificial Heats, or withering in an Air and Soil that
are not adapted to them. I must not omit, that there
is a Fountain rising in the upper Part of my Garden,
which forms a little wandring Rill, and administers to
the Pleasure as well as the Plenty of the Place. I have
so conducted it, that it visits most of my Plantations,
and have taken particular Care to let it run in the same
Manner as it would do in an open Field, so that it
generally passes through Banks of Violets and Prim-
roses, Plats of Willow, or other Plants, that seem to
be of its own producing.'

The Spectator, No. 477



359



SIR RICHARD STEELE

1672-1729

236 His First Qrief

THE first Sense of Sorrow I ever knew was upon the
Death of my Father, at which Time I was not quite
Five Years of Age ; but was rather amazed at what all
the House meant, than possessed with a real Under-
standing why no Body was willing to play with me.
I remember I went into the Room where his Body lay,
and my Mother sat weeping alone by it. I had my
Battledore in my Hand, and fell a beating the Coffin,
and calling Papa ; for, I know not how, I had some
slight Idea that he was locked up there. My Mother
catched me in her Arms, and, transported beyond all
Patience of the silent Grief she was before in, she
almost smothered me in her Embraces ; and told me
in a Flood of Tears, Papa could not hear me, and would
play with me no more, for they were going to put
him under Ground, where he could never come to us
again. She was a very beautiful Woman, of a noble
Spirit, and there was a Dignity in her Grief amidst
all the Wildness of her Transport ; which, methought,
struck me with an Instinct of Sorrow, that, before I was
sensible of what it was to grieve, seized my very Soul,
and has made Pity the Weakness of my Heart ever
since. The Mind in Infancy is, methinks, like the
Body in Embryo ; and receives Impressions so forcible,
that they are as hard to be removed by Reason, as any
Mark, with which a Child is born, is to be taken away
by any future Application. Hence it is, that Good-
nature in me is no Merit ; but having been so fre-
quently overwhelmed with her Tears before I knew
the Cause of any Affliction, or could draw Defences
360



SIR RICHARD STEELE



from my own Judgment, I imbibed Commiseration,
Remorse, and an unmanly Gentleness of Mind, which
has since insnared me into Ten Thousand Calamities ;
and from whence I can reap no Advantage, except it
be, that, in such a Humour as I am now in, I can the
better indulge myself in the Softnesses of Humanity,
and enjoy that sweet Anxiety which arises from the
Memory of past Afflictions.

The Taller, No. 181

237 £Mr. 'Bickerstaff visits a Friend

THERE are several Persons who have many Pleasures
and Entertainments in their Possession, which
they do not enjoy. It is therefore a kind and good
Office to acquaint them with their own Happiness, and
turn their Attention to such Instances of their good
Fortune as they are apt to overlook. Persons in
the married State often want such a Monitor ; and
pine away their Days, by looking upon the same
Condition in Anguish and Murmur, which carries with
it in the Opinion of others a Complication of all the
Pleasures of Life, and a Retreat from its Inquietudes.

I am led into this Thought by a Visit I made an
old Friend, who was formerly my School- Fellow. He
came to Town last Week with his Family for the
Winter, and yesterday Morning sent me Word his
Wife expected me to Dinner. I am as it were at Home
at that House, and every Member of it knows me for
their Well-wisher. I cannot indeed express the
Pleasure it is, to be met by the Children with so much
Joy as I am when I go thither : The Boys and Girls
strive who shall come first, when they think it is I that
am knocking at the Door ; and that Child which loses

361



SIR RICHARD STEELE



the Race to me, runs back again to tell the Father it is
Mr. Bickerstaff. This Day I was led in by a Pretty
Girl that we all thought must have forgot me ; for
the Family has been out of Town these two Years.
Her knowing me again was a mighty Subject with us,
and took up our Discourse at the first Entrance. After
which, they began to rally me upon a thousand little
Stories they heard in the Country, about my Marriage
to one of my Neighbour's Daughters : Upon which
the Gentleman, my Friend, said, ' Nay, if Mr. Bicker-
staff marries a Child of any of his old Companions,
I hope mine shall have the Preference ; there is Mrs.
Mary is now Sixteen, and would make him as fine
a Widow as the best of them : But I know him too
well ; he is so enamoured with the very Memory of
those who flourished in our Youth, that he will not so
much as look upon the modern Beauties. I remember,
old Gentleman, how often you went Home in a Day
to refresh your Countenance and Dress, when Tera-
minta reigned in your Heart. As we came up in the
Coach, I repeated to my Wife some of your Verses on
her.' With such Reflections on little Passages which
happened long ago, we passed our Time during a chear-
ful and elegant Meal. After Dinner, his Lady left the
room, as did also the Children. As soon as we were
alone, he took me by the Hand ; Well, my good
Friend, says he, I am heartily glad to see thee ; I was
afraid you would never have seen all the Company that
dined with you to Day again. Do not you think the
good Woman of the House a little altered since you
followed her from the Playhouse, to find out who she
was for me? I perceived a Tear fall down his Cheek
as he spoke, which moved me not a little. But to
turn the Discourse, I said, She is not indeed quite that
362



SIR RICHARD STEELE



Creature she was when she returned me the Letter
I carried from you ; and told me, she hoped, as I was
a Gentleman, I would be employed no more to trouble
her, who had never offended me ; but would be so
much the Gentleman's Friend as to disswade him from
a Pursuit which he could never succeed in. You may
remember, I thought her in earnest ; and you were
forced to employ your Cousin W til, who made his
Sister get acquainted with her for you. You cannot
expect her to be for ever Fifteen. Fifteen ! replied
my good Friend : Ah ! you little understand, you
that have lived a Bachelor, how great, how exquisite
a Pleasure there is in being really beloved ! It is
impossible that the most beauteous Face in Nature
should raise in me such pleasing Ideas, as when I look
upon that excellent Woman. That Fading in her
Countenance is chiefly caused by her watching with
me in my Fever. This was followed by a Fit of
Sickness, which had like to have carried her off last
Winter. . . Her Face is to me much more beautiful than
when I first saw it ; there is no Decay in any Feature,
which I cannot trace from the very Instant it was
occasioned by some anxious Concern for my Welfare
and Interests. . . Oh ! she is an inestimable Jewel. In
her Examination of her Houshold Affairs, she shews
a certain Fearfulness to find a Fault, which makes her
Servants obey her like Children ; and the meanest we
have has an ingenuous Shame for an Offence, not always
to be seen in Children in other Families. I speak freely
to you, my old Friend ; ever since her Sickness, Things
that gave me the quickest Joy before, turn now to
a certain Anxiety.

He would have gone on in this tender Way, when
the good Lady entered, and with an inexpressible

363



SIR RICHARD STEELE



Sweetness in her Countenance told us, she had been
searching her Closet for something very good, to treat
such an old Friend as I was. Her Husband's Eyes
sparkled with Pleasure at the Chearfulness of her
Countenance ; and I saw all his Fears vanish in an
Instant. The Lady observing something in our Looks
which shewed we had been more serious than ordinary,
and seeing her Husband receive her with great Concern
under a forced Chearfulness, immediately guessed at
what we had been talking of ; and applying herself
to me, said, with a Smile, Mr. Bickerstaff, don't
believe a Word of what he tells you, I shall still live
to have you for my Second, as I have often promised
you, unless he takes more care of Himself than he has
done since his coming to Town. You must know, he
tells me, That he finds London is a much more healthy
Place than the Country ; for he sees several of his old
Acquaintance and School-fellows are here young
Fellows with fair full-bottomed Periwigs. I could
scarce keep him this Morning from going out open-
breasted. My Friend, who is always extremely de-
lighted with her agreeable Humour, made her sit down
with us. She did it with that Easiness which is peculiar
to Women of Sense ; and to keep up the good Humour
she had brought in with her, turned her Raillery upon
me : Mr. Bickerstaff, you remember you followed me
one Night from the Playhouse ; Supposing you should
carry me thither to Morrow Night, and lead me into
the Front-Box. This put us into a long Field of Dis-
course about the Beauties, who were Mothers to the
present, and shined in the Boxes twenty Years ago.
I told her, I was glad she had transferred so many of
her Charms, and I did not question but her eldest
Daughter was within Half a Year of being a Toast.
364



SIR RICHARD STEELE



We were pleasing ourselves with this fantastical
Preferment of the young Lady, when on a sudden
we were alarmed with the Noise of a Drum, and
immediately entered my little Godson to give me a
Point of War. His Mother, between Laughing and
Chiding, would have put him out of the Room ; but
I would not part with him so. I found upon Conversa-
tion with him, though he was a little noisy in his
Mirth, that the Child had excellent Parts, and was
a great Master of all the Learning on t'other Side
Eight Years old. I perceived him a very great Historian
in Aisop's Fables : But he frankly declared to me his
Mind, that he did not delight in that Learning, because
he did not believe they were true ; for which Reason
I found he had very much turned his Studies, for
about a Twelve month past, into the Lives and Adven-
tures of Don Behanis of Greece, Guy of Warwick, the
Seven Champions, and other Historians of that Age. . . .
I was extolling his Accomplishments, when the Mother
told me, That the little Girl who led me in this Morn-
ing, was in her Way a better Scholar than he : Betty,
(said she,) deals chiefly m Fairies and Sprights ; and
sometimes in a Winter-Night will terrify the Maids
with her Accounts, until they are afraid to go up to
Bed.

I sat with them until it was very late, sometimes in
merry, sometimes in serious Discourse, with this
particular Pleasure, which gives the only true Relish
to all Conversation, a Sense that every one of us liked
each other. I went Home, considering the different
Conditions of a married Life and that of a Bachelor ;
and I must confess it struck me with a secret Concern,
to reflect, that whenever I go off, I shall leave no
Traces behind me. In this pensive Mood I returned

365



SIR RICHARD STEELE



to my Family ; that is to say, to my Maid, my Dog, and
my Cat, who only can be the better or worse for what
happens to me.

The Taller, No. 95

238 <±A Dream after c I(eading in Bed

AFTER the Lassitude of a Day, spent in the strolling
. Manner, which is usual with Men of Pleasure in
this Town, and with a Head full of a Million of Im-
pertinencies, which had danced round it for ten Hours
together, I came to my Lodging, and hastened to bed.
My V alet de Chambre knows my University-Trick of
reading there ; and he, being a good Scholar for a
Gentleman, ran over the Names of Horace, Tibullus,
Ovid, and others, to know which I would have. Bring
V irgil, said I ; and, if I fall asleep, take care of the
Candle. I read the Sixth Book over with the most
exquisite Delight, and had gone half through it a
second time, when the pleasant Ideas of Elysian Fields,
deceased Worthies walking in them, sincere Lovers
enjoying their Languishment without Pain, Compas-
sion for the unhappy Spirits who had mispent their
short Day-light, and were exiled from the Seats of
Bliss for ever ; I say, I was deep again in my Reading,
when this Mixture of Images had taken place of all
others in my Imagination before, and lulled me into
a Dream, from which I am just awake, to my great
Disadvantage. The happy Mansions of Elysium, by
degrees, seemed to be wafted from me, and the very
Traces of my late waking Thoughts began to fade
away, when I was cast by a sudden Whirlwind upon an
Island, encompassed with a roaring and troubled Sea,
which shaked its very Centre, and rocked its Inhabi-
366



SIR RICHARD STEELE



tants as in a Cradle. The Islanders lay on their Faces
without offering to look up, or hope for Preservation ;
all her Harbours were crowded with Mariners, and tall
Vessels of War lay in Danger of being driven to pieces
on her Shores. Bless me ! said I, why have I lived in
such a Manner, that the Convulsion of Nature should
be so terrible to me, when I feel in myself that the
better Part of me is to survive it ? Oh ! may that be
in Happiness.

The Taller, No. 8

2J9 <iA True >£Maghtrate

IT would become all Men, as well as me, to lay
before them the noble Character of Verus the
Magistrate, who always sat in Triumph over, and Con-
tempt of, Vice : He never searched after it, or spared
it when it came before him : At the same time, he
could see through the Hypocrisy and Disguise of those,
who have no Pretence to Virtue themselves, but by
their Severity to the Vicious. The same Verus was, in
Times long past, Chief Justice (as we call it amongst us)
in Felicia. He was a Man of profound Knowledge of
the Laws of his Country, and as just an Observer of
them in his own Person. He considered Justice as
a Cardinal Virtue, not as a Trade for Maintenance.
Wherever he was Judge, he never forgot that he was
also Counsel. The Criminal before him was always
sure he stood before his Country, and, in a sort, a
Parent of it. The Prisoner knew, that though his
Spirit was broken with Guilt, and incapable of Lan-
guage to defend itself, all would be gathered from him
which could conduce to his Safety ; and that his Judge
would wrest no Law to destroy him, nor conceal any
that could save him. In his Time there was a Nest of



367



SIR RICHARD STEELE



Pretenders to Justice, who happened to be employed,
to put Things in a Method for being examined before
him at his usual Sessions : These Animals were to
Verus, as Monkies are to Men, so like, that you can
hardly disown them ; but so base, that you are
ashamed of their Fraternity. It grew a phrase, Who
would do Justice on the Justices? That certainly
would Verus.

The Tatler, No. 14

240 Satire

THE ordinary Subjects for Satire are such as incite
the greatest Indignation in the best Tempers, and
consequently Men of such a make are the best qualified
for speaking of the Offences in Human Life. These
Men can behold Vice and Folly, when they injure
Persons to whom they are wholly unacquainted, with
the same severity as others resent the Ills they do to
themselves. A good-natured Man cannot see an over-
bearing Fellow put a bashful Man of Merit out of
Countenance, or out-strip him in the pursuit of any
Advantage, but he is on Fire to succour the oppressed,
to produce the Merit of the One, and confront the
Impudence of the Other. . .

There is a certain Impartiality necessary to make
what a Man says bear any Weight with those he speaks
to. This Quality, with respect to Men's Errors and
Vices, is never seen but in good-natured Men. They
have ever such a Frankness of Mind, and Benevolence
to all Men, that they cannot receive Impressions of
Unkindness without mature Deliberation ; and writing
or speaking ill of a man upon personal Considerations,
is so irreparable and mean an Injury, that no one
possessed of this quality is capable of doing it : but in
368



SIR RICHARD STEELE



all Ages there have been Interpreters to Authors when
living, of the same Genius with the Commentators into
whose Hands they fall when dead. I dare say it is
impossible for any Man of more Wit than one of these
to take any of the four-and-twenty Letters, and form
out of them a name to describe the Character of a
vicious Man with greater Life, but one of these would
immediately cry, ' Mr. Such-a-one is meant in that
Place.' But the Truth of it is, Satirists describe the
Age, and Backbiters assign their Descriptions to
private Men.

The Taller, No. 242

HENRY ST. JOHN, VISCOUNT
BOLINGBROKE

1678-1751

241 The Statesman and the Qharlatan

WE may observe much the same difference
between wisdom and cunning, both as to the
objects they propose and to the means they employ,
as we observe between the visual powers of different
men. One sees distinctly the objects that are near to
him, their immediate relations, and their direct
tendencies : and a sight like this serves well enough the
purpose of those who concern themselves no further.
The cunning minister is one of those : he neither sees,
nor is concerned to see, any further than his personal
interests, and the support of his administration,
require. If such a man overcomes any actual difficulty,
avoids any immediate distress, or, without doing either
of these effectually, gains a little time by all the low
artifice which cunning is ready to suggest and baseness
of mind to employ, he triumphs, and is flattered by

369



HENRY ST. JOHN

his mercenary train, on the great event ; which
amounts often to no more than this, that he got into
distress by one series of faults, and out of it by another.
The wise minister sees, and is concerned to see further,
because government has a further concern : he sees
the objects that are distant as well as those that are
near, and all their remote relations, and even their
indirect tendencies. He thinks of fame as well as of
applause, and prefers that, which to be enjoyed must
be given, to that which may be bought. He considers
his administration as a single day in the great year
of government ; but as a day that is affected by those
which went before, and that must affect those which
are to follow. He combines, therefore, and compares
all these objects, relations, and tendencies : and the
judgement he makes, on an entire not a partial survey
of them, is the rule of his conduct. That scheme of the
reason of state, which lies open before a wise minister,
contains all the great principles of government, and
all the great interests of his country : so that, as he
prepares some events, he prepares against others,
whether they be likely to happen during his administra-
tion, or in some future time.

Idea of a Patriot King

242 The Sea our Element

' ARE we never to be soldiers i ' it will be said.
X\. Yes, constantly, in such proportion as is necessary
for the defence of good government. To establish
such a military force as none but bad governors can
want, is to establish tyrannical power in the king or
in the ministers ; and may be wanted by the latter,
when the former would be secure without his army,

37°



VISCOUNT BOLINGBROKE



if he broke his minister. Occasionally too we must be
soldiers, and for offence as well as defence ; but in
proportion to the nature of the conjuncture, con-
sidered always relatively to the difference here insisted
upon between our situation, our interest, and the nature
of our strength, compared with those of the other
powers of Europe ; and not in proportion to the
desires, or even to the wants, of the nations with whom
we are confederated. Like other amphibious animals,
we must come occasionally on shore : but the water
is more properly our element, and in it, like them, as
we find our greatest security, so we exert our greatest
force.

Idea of a Patriot King

CONYERS MIDDLETON

1 683-1 750

243 T'he '■Political Qharacter of Qicero

HE made a just distinction, between bearing what
we cannot help, and. approving what we ought to con-
demn ; and submitted therefore, yet never consented to
those usurpations ; and when he was forced to comply
with them, did it always with a reluctance, that he
expresses very keenly in his letters to his friends. But
whenever that force was removed, and he was at
liberty to pursue his principles, and act without
controul, as in his Consulship, in his Province, and after
Caesar's death ; the onely periods of his life, in which
he was truly Master of himself ; there we see him
shining out in his genuine character, of an excellent
Citizen ; a great Magistrate ; a glorious Patriot :
there we see the man, who could declare of himself
with truth, in an appeal to Atticus, as to the best

37i



CONYERS MIDDLETON



witness of his conscience, that he had always done the
greatest services to his country, when it was in his power ;
or when it was not, had never harboured a thought of it,
but what was divine.

Life of Cicero

GEORGE BERKELEY, BISHOP OF
CLOYNE

i 685-1 753

244 ^Matter for a <£May ^Morning

PHILONOUS. Good Morrow, Hylas : I did not
expect to find you abroad so early.
Hylas. It is indeed something unusual ; but my
Thoughts were so taken up with a Subject I was dis-
coursing of last Night, that finding I could not sleep,
I resolved to rise and take a turn in the Garden.

Philonous. It happened well, to let you see what inno-
cent and agreeable Pleasures you lose every Morning.
Can there be a pleasanter time of the Day, or a more
delightful Season of the Year f That purple Sky, those
wild but sweet Notes of Birds, the fragrant Bloom
upon the Trees and Flowers, the gentle Influence of
the rising Sun, these and a thousand nameless Beauties
of Nature inspire the Soul with secret Transports ; its
Faculties too being at this time fresh and lively, arc
fit for those Meditations, which the Solitude of a
Garden and Tranquillity of the Morning naturally
dispose us to. But I am afraid I interrupt your
Thoughts : for you seemed very intent on something.

Hylas. It is true, I was, and shall be obliged to you
if you will permit me to go on in the same Vein ; not
that I would by any means deprive myself of your
Company, for my Thoughts always flow more easily in
372



GEORGE BERKELEY



Conversation with a Friend, than when I am alone :
but my Request is, that you would suffer me to impart
my Reflexions to you.

Philonous. With all my Heart, it is what I should
have requested myself if you had not prevented me.

Hylas. I was considering the odd Fate of those Men
who have in all Ages, through an Affectation of being
distinguished from the Vulgar, or some unaccountable
Turn of Thought, pretended either to believe nothing
at all, or to believe the most extravagant Things in the
World. This however might be borne, if their Para-
doxes and Scepticism did not draw after them some
Consequences of general Disadvantage to Mankind.
But the Mischief lieth here ; that when Men of less
Leisure see them who are supposed to have spent their
whole time in the Pursuits of Knowledge professing
an entire Ignorance of all Things, or advancing such
Notions as are repugnant to plain and commonly re-
ceived Principles, they will be tempted to entertain Sus-
picions concerning the most important Truths, which
they had hitherto held sacred and unquestionable.

Philonous. I entirely agree with you, as to the ill Ten-
dency of the affected Doubts of some Philosophers, and
fantastical Conceits of others. I am even so far gone
of late in this way of Thinking, that I have quitted
several of the sublime Notions I had got in their Schools
for vulgar Opinions. And I give it you on my Word ;
since this Revolt from Metaphysical Notions to the
plain Dictates of Nature and common Sense, I find
my Understanding strangely enlightened, so that I can
now easily comprehend a great many Things which
before were all Mystery and Riddle.

Hylas. I agree with you. Material Substance was no

373



GEORGE BERKELEY



more than an. Hypothesis ; and a false and groundless
one too. I will no longer spend my Breath in Defence
of it. But whatever Hypothesis you advance, or what-
soever Scheme of Things you introduce in its stead,
I doubt not it will appear every whit as false : Let me
but be allowed to question you upon it. . .

Philonous. I assure you, Hylas, I do not pretend to
frame any Hypothesis at all. I am of a vulgar Cast,
simple enough to believe my Senses, and leave Things
as I find them.

Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous



245 <iAnodynes for the Spleen

T TSICLES. Play is a serious amusement, that comes
/ j to the relief of a Man of pleasure after the more
lively and affecting enjoyments of Sense. It kills time
beyond anything ; and is a most admirable Anodyne
to divert or prevent thought, which might otherwise
prey upon the mind.

Crito. I can easily comprehend that no Man upon
Earth ought to prize Anodynes for the Spleen more
than a Man of fashion and pleasure. An ancient Sage,
speaking of one of that character, saith he is made
wretched by disappointments and appetites, XviKLTai
a-noTvyy&vaiv koX ini6vy.Siv. And if this was true of
the Greeks, who lived in the Sun, and had so much
Spirit, I am apt to think it is still more so of our modern
English. Something there is in our climate and com-
plexion that makes idleness nowhere so much its own
punishment as in England, where an uneducated fine
Gentleman pays for his momentary pleasures, with
long and cruel intervals of Spleen : for relief of which
374



BISHOP OF CLOYNE



he is driven into sensual excesses, that produce a pro-
portionable depression of Spirits, which, as it createth
a greater want of pleasures, so it lessens the ability to
enjoy them. There is a cast of Thought in the Com-
plexion of an Englishman, which renders him the most
unsuccessful Rake in the World. He is (as Aristotle
expresseth it) at variance with himself. He is neither
Brute enough to enjoy his appetites, nor Man enough
to govern them.

Alnphron

246 The Fox- hunters

WE amused ourselves next Day every one to his
Fancy till Nine of the Clock, when Word was
brought that the Tea-table was set in the Library,
which is a Gallery on a Ground-floor, with an arched
Door at one End opening into a Walk of Limes ;
where, as soon as we had drunk Tea, we were tempted
by fine Weather to take a Walk which led us to a small
Mount of easy Ascent, on the Top whereof we found
a Seat under a spreading Tree. Here we had a Prospect
on one hand of a narrow Bay or Creek of the Sea,
enclosed on either Side by a Coast beautified with
Rocks and Woods, and green Banks and Farm-houses.
At the End of the Bay was a small Town, placed upon
the Slope of a Hill, which, from the Advantage of
its Situation, made a considerable Figure. Several
Fishing-boats and Lighters, gliding up and down on
a Surface as smooth and bright as Glass, enlivened the
Prospect. On the other Side, we looked down on green
Pastures, Flocks, and Herds basking beneath in Sunshine,
while we, in our superior Situation, enjoyed the Fresh-
ness of Air and Shade.



375



GEORGE BERKELEY



Here we felt that sort of joyful Instinct which a rural
Scene and fine Weather inspire ; and proposed no small
Pleasure in resuming and continuing our Conference
without Interruption till Dinner. But we had hardly
seated ourselves and looked about us when we saw
a Fox run by the Foot of our Mount into an adjacent
Thicket. A few Minutes after, we heard a confused
Noise of the opening of Hounds, the winding of Horns,
and the roaring of Country Squires. While our Atten-
tion was suspended by this Event, a Servant came
running, out of Breath, and told Cnto that his Neigh-
bour Ctesippus, a Squire of Note, was fallen from his
Horse, attempting to leap over a Hedge, and brought
into the Hall, where he lay for dead. Upon which we
all rose, and walked hastily to the House, where we
found Ctesippus just come to himself, in the midst of
half-a-dozen Sun-burnt Squires, in Frocks, and short
Wigs, and Jockey-Boots. Being asked how he did, he
answered it was only a broken Rib. With some Diffi-
culty Cnto persuaded him to lie on a Bed till the
Chirurgeon came. These Fox-hunters, having been
up early at their Sport, were eager for Dinner, which
was accordingly hastened. They passed the Afternoon
in a loud rustic Mirth, gave Proof of their Religion
and Loyalty by the Healths they drank, talked of
Hounds, and Horses, and Elections, and Country
Affairs, till the Chirurgeon, who had been employed
about Ctesippus, desired he might be put into Crito's
Coach, and sent home, having refused to stay all Night.

Our Guests being gone, we reposed ourselves after
the Fatigue of this tumultuous Visit, and next Morning
assembled again at the Seat on the Mount.

Now Lysicles, being a nice Man and a bel esprit, had
an infinite Contempt for the rough Manners and
376



BISHOP OF CLOYNE



Conversation of Fox-hunters, and could not reflect
with Patience that he had lost, as he called it, so many
Hours in their Company. I flattered myself, said he,
that there had been none of this Species remaining
among us : Strange that Men should be diverted with
such uncouth Noise and Hurry, or find Pleasure in the
Society of Dogs and Horses ! How much more elegant
are the Diversions of the Town !

There seems, replied Euphranor, to be some Resem-
blance between Fox-hunters and Free-thinkers ; the
former exerting their animal Faculties in pursuit of
Game, as you Gentlemen employ your Intellectuals in
the pursuit of Truth. The kind of Amusement is the
same, although the Object be different.

Alaphron

ALEXANDER POPE

1688-1744

247 On 'Translating the Classics

IT is certain no literal Translation can be just to an
excellent Original in a superior Language : but
it is a great Mistake to imagine (as many have done)
that a rash Paraphrase can make amends for this
general Defect ; which is no less in danger to lose the
Spirit of an Ancierft, by deviating into the modern
Manners of Expression. If there be sometimes a
Darkness, there is often a Light in Antiquity, which
nothing better preserves than a Version almost literal.
I know no Liberties one ought to take, but those which
are necessary for transfusing the Spirit of the Original,
and supporting the Poetical Style of the Translation :
and I will venture to say, there have not been more
Men misled in former times by a servile dull Adherence

377



ALEXANDER POPE

to the Letter, than have been deluded in ours by a
chimerical insolent Hope of raising and improving
their Author. It is not to be doubted that the Fire
of the Poem is what a Translator should principally
regard, as it is most likely to expire in his managing :
However it is his safest way to be content with pre-
serving this to his utmost in the Whole, without
endeavouring to be more than he finds his Author is,
in any particular Place. 'Tis a great Secret in Writing
to know when to be plain, and when poetical and
figurative ; and it is what Homer will teach us if we
will but follow modestly in his Footsteps. Where his
Diction is bold and lofty, let us raise ours as high as we
can ; but where his is plain and humble, we ought not
to be deterr'd from imitating him by the fear of in-
curring the Censure of a meer English Critick. Noth-
ing that belongs to Homer seems to have been more
commonly mistaken than the just Pitch of his Style :
Some of his Translators having swell'd into Fustian
in a proud Confidence of the Sublime ; others sunk into
Flatness in a cold and timorous Notion of Simplicity.
Methinks I see these different Followers of Homer,
some sweating and straining after him by violent
Leaps and Bounds, (the certain Signs of false Mettle)
others slowly and servilely creeping in his Train, while
the Poet himself is all the time 'proceeding with an
unaffected and equal Majesty before them. However
of the two Extreams one could sooner pardon Frenzy
than Frigidity : No Author is to be envy'd for such
Commendations as he may gain by that Character of
Style, which his Friends must agree together to call
Simplicity, and the rest of the World will call Dulness.
There is a graceful and dignify'd Simplicity, as well
as a bald and sordid one, which differ as much from
378



ALEXANDER POPE



each other as the Air of a plain Man from that of
a Sloven : 'Tis one thing to be tricked up, and another
not to be dress'd at all. Simplicity is the Mean
between Ostentation and Rusticity.

Preface to the ' Iliad '

248 <iAn zAncient Country Seat

YOU must expect nothing regular in my description
of a house that seems to be built before rules
were in fashion ; the whole is so disjointed and the
parts so detached from each other and yet so joining
again one cannot tell how, that (in a poetical fit) you
would imagine it had been a village in Amphion's
time, where twenty cottages had taken a dance
together, were all out, and stood still in amazement
ever since. A stranger would be grievously disap-
pointed who should ever think to get into this house
the right way ; one would expect after entering
through the porch to be let into the hall ; alas !
nothing less ; you find yourself in a brewhouse. From
the parlour you think to step into the drawing-room ;
but upon opening the iron-nailed door, you are con-
vinced by a flight of birds about your ears, and a cloud
of dust in your eyes, that it is the pigeon-house. On
each side our porch are two chimneys, that wear their
greens on the outside, which would do as well within,
for whenever we make a fire, we let the smoke out of the
windows. Over the parlour window hangs a sloping
balcony, which time has turned to a very convenient
pent -house. The top is crowned with a very venerable
tower, so like that of the church just by, that the jack-
daws build in it as if it were the true steeple.

379



ALEXANDER POPE



The great hall is high and spacious, flanked with
long tables, images of ancient hospitality ; ornamented
with monstrous horns, about twenty broken pikes, and
a match-lock musquet or two, which they say were
used in the civil wars. . .

Our best room above is very long and low, of the
exact proportion of a bandbox : it has hangings of
the finest work in the world, those, I mean, which
Arachne spins out of her own bowels ; indeed the
roof is so decayed, that after a favourable shower of
rain, we may (with God's blessing) expect a crop of
mushrooms between the chinks of the floors.

All this upper story has for many years had no other
inhabitants than certain rats, whose very age renders
them worthy of this venerable mansion, for the very
rats of this ancient seat are grey. Since these had not
quitted it, we hope at least this house may stand
during the small remainder of days these poor animals
have to live, who are now too infirm to remove to
another : they have still a small subsistence left them
in the few remaining books of the library.

I had never seen half what I have described, but for
an old starched greyheaded steward, who is as much
an antiquity as any in the place, and looks like an old
family picture walked out of its frame. He failed
not, as we passed from room to room, to relate several
memoirs of the family, but his observations were
particularly curious in the cellar : he showed where
stood the triple rows of butts of sack, and where were
ranged the bottles of tent for toasts in the morning :
he pointed to the stands that supported the iron-
hooped hogsheads of strong beer ; then stepping to
a corner, he lugged out the tattered fragment of an
unframed picture : ' This (says he, with tears in his
380



ALEXANDER POPE



eyes) was poor Sir Thomas, once master of the drink
I told you of : he had two sons (poor young masters !)
that never arrived to the age of this beer ; they both
fell ill in this very cellar, and never went out upon
their own legs.'

Letter from Stanton Har court



249 zA 'Tragic Tastoral

I HAVE a mind to fill the rest of this paper with an
accident that happened just under my eyes, and
has made a great impression upon me. I have just
passed part of this summer at an old romantic seat
of my Lord Harcourt's, which he lent me. It over-
looks a common-field, where, under the shade of a
haycock, sat two lovers, as constant as ever were
found in romance, beneath a spreading beech. The
name of the one (let it sound as it will) was John
Hewet ; of the other, Sarah Drew. John was a well
set man about five and twenty, Sarah a brown woman
of eighteen. John had for several months borne the
labour of the day in the same field with Sarah ; when
she milked, it was his morning and evening charge to
bring the cows to her pail. Their love was the talk,
but not the scandal, of the whole neighbourhood ; for
all they aimed at was the blameless possession of each
other in marriage. It was but this very morning that
he had obtained her parents' consent, and it was but
till the next week that they were to wait to be happy.
Perhaps this very day, in the intervals of their work,
they were talking of their wedding clothes ; and
John was now matching several kinds of poppies and
field-flowers to her complexion, to make her a present

381



ALEXANDER POPE

of knots for the day. While they were thus employed
(it was on the last of July,) a terrible storm of thunder
and lightning arose, that drove the labourers to what
shelter the trees or hedges afforded. Sarah, frighted
and out of breath, sunk on a haycock, and John (who
never separated from her) sate by her side, having
raked two or three heaps together to secure her.
Immediately there was heard so loud a crack as if
heaven had burst asunder. The labourers, all solicitous
for each other's safety, called to one another : those
that were nearest our lovers, hearing no answer,
stepped to the place where they lay : they first saw
a little smoke, and after, this faithful pair ;■ — John
with one arm about his Sarah's neck, and the other
held over her face, as if to screen her from the lightning.
They were struck dead, and already grown stiff and
cold in this tender posture. There was no mark
or discolouring on their bodies, only that Sarah's
eyebrow was a little singed, and a small spot between
her breasts. They were buried the next day in one
grave, in the parish of Stanton Harcourt in Oxford-
shire ; where my Lord Harcourt, at my request, has
erected a monument over them.

Letter to Lady Mary Montagu, I September, 1718

LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU

1689-1762

250 To £Mr. 'Pope, jrom <tAdrianople

I AM at this present moment writing in a house situ-
ated on the banks of the Hebrus, which runs under
my chamber window. My garden is full of tall cypress-
382



LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU



trees, upon the branches of which several couple of
true turtles are saying soft things to one another from
morning till night. How naturally do boughs and
vows come into my mind at this minute ! And must
not you confess, to my praise, that 'tis more than an
ordinary discretion that can resist the wicked sugges-
tions of poetry, in a place where truth, for once,
furnishes all the ideas of pastoral? The summer is
already far advanced in this part of the world ; and,
for some miles round Adrianople, the whole ground
is laid out in gardens, and the banks of the rivers are
set with rows of fruit trees, under which all the most
considerable Turks divert themselves every evening ;
not with walking, that is not one of their pleasures,
but a set party of them choose out a green spot,
where the shade is very thick, and there they spread
a carpet, on which they sit drinking their coffee, and
are generally attended by some slave with a fine voice,
or that plays on some instrument. Every twenty
paces you may see one of these little companies
listening to the dashing of the river ; and this taste
is so universal, that the very gardeners are not without
it. . . The young lads generally divert themselves with
making garlands for their favourite lambs, which I
have often seen painted and adorned with flowers,
lying at their feet while they sung or played. It is
not that they ever read Romances, but these are the
ancient amusements here, and as natural to them as
cudgel-playing and foot-ball to our British swains ;
the softness and warmth of the climate forbidding
all rough exercises, which were never so much as heard
of amongst them, and naturally inspiring a laziness
and aversion to labour, which the great plenty indulges.

383



LADY MARY WORTLEY MONTAGU



These gardeners are the only happy race of country
people in Turkey. They furnish all the city with fruits
and herbs, and seem to live very easily. They are most
of them Greeks, and have little houses in the midst
of their gardens, where their wives and daughters
take a liberty not permitted in the town, I mean, to
go unveiled. These wenches are very neat and hand-
some, and pass their time at their looms under the
shade of the trees.

Letters



SAMUEL RICHARDSON

168^-1761

251 zA Filial Victim

Miss Clarissa Harlowe, to Miss Howe

Friday, March 3.

OMY dear friend, I have had a sad conflict ! trial
upon trial ; conference upon conference ! — But
what law, what ceremony, can give a man a right to
a heart which abhors him more than it does any of
God Almighty's creatures?

I hope my mamma will be able to prevail for me.
— But I will recount all, tho' I sit up the whole
night to do it ; for I have a vast deal to write ; and
will be as minute as you wish me to be.

In my last, I told you, in a fright, my apprehensions ;
which were grounded upon a conversation that passed
between my mamma and my aunt, part of which
Hannah overheard. I need not give you the further
384



SAMUEL RICHARDSON



particulars ; since what I have to relate to you from
different conversations that have passed between my
mamma and me in the space of a very few hours, will
include them all. I will begin then.

I went down this morning, when breakfast was ready,
with a very uneasy heart, from what Hannah had told
me yesterday afternoon ; wishing for an opportunity,
however, to appeal to my mamma, in hopes to engage
her interest in my behalf, and purposing to try to
find one, when she retired to her own apartment after
breakfast : — But, unluckily, there was the odious
Solmes sitting asquat between my mamma and sister,
with so much assurance in his looks ! — But you know,
my dear, that those we love not, cannot do any-thing
to please us.

Had the wretch kept his seat, it might have been
well enough : But the bent and broad-shoulder'd
creature must needs rise, and stalk towards a chair,
which was just by that which was set for me.

I removed it at a distance, as if to make way to my
own : And down I sat, abruptly I believe ; what I had
heard, all in my head.

But this was not enough to daunt him : The man
is a very confident, he is a very bold, staring man !
Indeed, my dear, the man is very confident.

He took the removed chair, and drew it so near
mine, squatting in it with his ugly weight, that he
press'd upon my hoop. — I was so offended (all I had
heard, as I said, in my head), that I removed to another
chair. I own I had too little command of myself :
It gave my brother and sister too much advantage ;
I dare say they took it : — But I did it involuntarily,
I think : I could not help it. — I knew not what I did.

I saw my papa was excessively displeased. When
2830 385



SAMUEL RICHARDSON



angry, no man's countenance ever shew'd it so much
as my papa's. Clarissa Harlowe ! said he, with a big
voice ; and there he stopp'd. — Sir ! said I, and cour-
tesy'd. — I trembled ; and put my chair nearer the
wretch, and sat down ; my face I could feel all in
a glow.

Make tea, child, said my kind mamma : Sit by me,
love ; and make tea.

I removed with pleasure to the seat the man had
quitted ; and being thus indulgently put into employ-
ment, soon recover'd myself ; and in the course of the
breakfasting officiously asked two or three questions of
Mr. Solmes, which I would not have done, but to make
up with my papa. — Proud spirits may be brought to ;
whisperingly spoke my sister to me, over her shoulder,
with an air of triumph and scorn : But I did not mind
her.

My mamma was all kindness and condescension. I
asked her once, if she were pleased with the tea ? She
said, softly, and again called me dear, she was pleased
with all I did. I was very proud of this encouraging
goodness : And all blew over, as I hoped, between my
papa and me ; for he also spoke kindly to me two or
three times.

Small incidents these, my dear, to trouble you with ;
only as they lead to greater ; as you shall hear.

Before the usual breakfast-time was over, my papa
withdrew with my mamma, telling her he wanted to
speak to her. My sister, and my aunt, who was with
us, next dropt away.

My brother gave himself some airs of insult, that I
understood well enough ; but which Mr. Solmes could
make nothing of : — And at last he arose from his seat — •
Sister, said he, I have a curiosity to shew you : I will
386



SAMUEL RICHARDSON

fetch it : And away he went ; shutting the door close
after him.

I saw what all this was for. I arose ; the man
hemming up for a speech, rising, and beginning to set
his splay-feet (indeed, my dear, the man in all his ways
is hateful to me) in an approaching posture. — I will
save my brother the trouble of bringing to me his
curiosity, said I. — I courtesy'd — Your servant, Sir —
The man cry'd, Madam, Madam, twice, and look'd
like a fool. — But away I went — to find my brother, to
save my word. — But my brother was gone, indifferent
as the weather was, to walk in the garden with my sister.
A plain case, that he had left his curiosity with me, and
design'd to shew me no other.

I had but just got into my own apartment, and
began to think of sending Hannah to beg an audience
of my mamma (the more encouraged by her condescend-
ing goodness at breakfast), when Shorey, her woman,
brought me her commands to attend her in her closet.

My papa, Hannah told me, had just gone out of it
with a positive, angry countenance. Then I as much
dreaded the audience, as I had wished for it before.

I went down, however ; but, apprehending the
subject, approached her trembling, and my heart in
visible palpitations.

She saw my concern. Holding out her kind arms,
as she sat, Come kiss me, my dear, said she, with a
smile like a sun-beam breaking thro' the cloud that
overshadowed her naturally benign aspect. Why
flutters my jewel so f

This preparative sweetness, with her goodness just
before, confirmed my apprehensions. My mamma saw
the bitter pill wanting gilding.

O my mamma ! was all I could say ; and I clasp'd

387



SAMUEL RICHARDSON



my arms round her neck, and my face sunk into her
bosom.

My child ! my child ! restrain, said she, your powers
of moving ! — I dare not else trust myself with you. —
And my tears trickled down her bosom, as hers bedew'd
my neck.

O the words of kindness, all to be express'd in vain,
that flow'd from her lips !

Lift up your sweet face, my best child, my own
Clarissa Harlowe ! — O my daughter, best-beloved of
my heart, lift up a face so ever-amiable to me ! — Why
these sobs ? — Is an apprehended duty so affecting a
thing, that before I can speak — But I am glad, my love,
you can guess at what I have to say to you. I am spared
the pains of breaking to you what was a task upon me
reluctantly enough undertaken to break to you.

Then rising, she drew a chair near her own, and made
me sit down by her, overwhelm'd as I was with tears
of apprehension of what she had to say, and of gratitude
for her truly maternal goodness to me ; sobs still my
only language.

And drawing her chair still nearer to mine, she put
her arms round my neck, and my glowing cheek, wet
with my tears, close to her own : Let me talk to you,
my child ; since silence is your choice, hearken to me,
and be silent.

You know, my dear, what I every day forego, and
undergo, for the sake of peace : Your papa is a very
good man, and means well ; but he will not be con-
trouled ; nor yet persuaded. You have seem'd to
pity me sometimes, that I am obliged to give up every
point. Poor man I his reputation the less for it ;
mine the greater ; yet would I not have this credit,
if I could help it, at so dear a rate to him and to
388



SAMUEL RICHARDSON



myself. You are a dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child,
she was pleased to say (in hope, no doubt, to make me
so) : You would not add, I am sure, to my trouble :
You would not wilfully break that peace which costs
your mamma so much to preserve. Obedience is
better than sacrifice. O my Clary Harlowe, rejoice
my heart, by telling me I have apprehended too much !
— I see your concern ! I see your perplexity ! I see
your conflict (loosing her arm, and rising, not willing
I should see how much she herself was affected). I
will leave you a moment. — Answer me not (for I was
essaying to speak, and had, as soon as she took her dear
cheek from mine, dropt down on my knees, my hands
clasped and lifted up in a supplicating manner) : I am
not prepared for your irresistible expostulation, she
was pleased to say. — I will leave you to recollection :
And I charge you, on my blessing, that all this my
truly maternal tenderness be not thrown away upon you.

And then she withdrew into the next apartment ;
wiping her eyes, as she went from me ; as mine over-
flow 'd. Clarissa; or, The History of a Young Lady



PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE,
EARL OF CHESTERFIELD

1694-1773

252 The cArt of 'Pleasing

London, October the 16th, O.S. 1747.

DEAR BOY,
The art of pleasing is a very necessary one to
possess ; but a very difficult one to acquire. It can
hardly be reduced to rules ; and your own good sense
and observation will teach you more of it than I can.

389



PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE



Do as you would be done by, is the surest method that
I know of pleasing. Observe carefully what pleases
you in others, and probably the same things in you
will please others. If you are pleased with the com-
plaisance and attention of others to your humours,
your tastes, or your weaknesses, depend upon it, the
same complaisance and attention, on your part, to
theirs, will equally please them. Take the tone of the
company, that you are in, and do not pretend to give
it ; be serious, gay, or even trifling, as you find the
present humour of the company : this is an attention
due from every individual to the majority. Do not
tell stories in company ; there is nothing more tedious
and disagreeable : if by chance you know a very short
story, and exceedingly applicable to the present
subject of conversation, tell it in as few words as
possible ; and even then, throw out that you do not
love to tell stories ; but that the shortness of it
tempted you. Of all things, banish the egotism out of
your conversation, and never think of entertaining
people with your own personal concerns, or private
affairs ; though they are interesting to you, they are
tedious and impertinent to every body else : besides
that, one cannot keep one's own private affairs too
secret. Whatever you think your own excellencies
may be, do not affectedly display them in company ;
nor labour, as many people do, to give that turn to
the conversation, which may supply you with an
opportunity of exhibiting them. If they are real,
they will infallibly be discovered, without your
pointing them out yourself, and with much more
advantage. Never maintain an argument with heat
and clamour, though you think or know yourself to
be in the right ; but give your opinion modestly
39°



EARL OF CHESTERFIELD



and coolly, which is the only way to convince ; and,
if that does not do, try to change the conversation, by
saying, with good humour, ' We shall hardly convince
one another, nor is it necessary that we should, so
let us talk of something else.'

Letters to his Son

253 Dissimulation

London, May the 22nd, O.S. 1749.

IT may be objected, that I am now recommending
dissimulation to you ; I both own and justify it.
It has been long said, Qui nescit dissimulate nescit
regnare : I go still farther, and say, that without some
dissimulation no business can be carried on at all. It
is simulation that is false, mean, and criminal : that
is the cunning which Lord Bacon calls, crooked or
left-handed wisdom, and which is never made use of
but by those who have not true wisdom. And the
same great man says, that dissimulation is only to
hide our own cards ; whereas simulation is put on in
order to look into other people's. Lord Bolingbroke,
in his ' Idea of a patriot King,' which he has lately
published, and which I will send you by the first
opportunity, says, very justly, that simulation is a
stiletto ; not only an unjust but an unlawful weapon,
and the use of it very rarely to be excused, never
justified. Whereas dissimulation is a shield, as secrecy
is armour ; and it is no more possible to preserve
secrecy in business, without some degree of dissimula-
tion, than it is to succeed in business without secrecy.
He goes on, and says, that those two arts, of dissimula-
tion and secrecy, are like the alloy mingled with pure
ore : a little is necessary, and will not debase the coin
below its proper standard ; but if more than that little

391



PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE



be employed (that is, simulation and cunning) the
coin loses its currency, and the coiner his credit.

Letters to his Son

254 Qollateral Security

London, January the 8th, O.S. 1750.

DEAR BOY,
I have seldom or never written to you upon the
subject of Religion and Morality : your own reason,
I am persuaded, has given you true notions of both;
they speak best for themselves ; but, if they wanted
assistance, you have Mr. Harte at hand, both for
precept and example : to your own reason, therefore,
and to Mr. Harte, shall I refer you, for the Reality of
both ; and confine myself, in this letter, to the decency,
the utility, and the necessity, of scrupulously pre-
serving the Appearances of both. When I say the
Appearances of religion, I do not mean that you should
talk or act like a Missionary, or an Enthusiast, nor that
you should take up a controversial cudgel, against
whoever attacks the sect you are of ; this would be
both useless, and unbecoming your age : but I mean
that you should by no means seem to approve,
encourage, or applaud, those libertine notions, which
strike at religions equally, and which are the poor
thread-bare topics of half Wits, and minute Philo-
sophers. Even those who are silly enough to laugh at
their jokes, are still wise enough to distrust and
detest their characters : for, putting moral virtues at
the highest, and religion at the lowest, religion must
still be allowed to be a collateral security, at least, to
Virtue ; and every prudent man will sooner trust to
two securities than to one.

Letters to hts Son

392



HENRY FIELDING

1707-1754

255 <£Mr. zAllmoorthy and the Foundling

MR. ALLWORTHT had been absent a full
Quarter of a Year in London, on some very
particular Business, though I know not what it was ;
but judge of its Importance, by its having detained
him so long from home, whence he had not been
absent a Month at a Time during the Space of many
Years. He came to his House very late in the Evening,
and after a short Supper with his Sister, retired much
fatigued to his Chamber. Here, having spent some
Minutes on his Knees, a Custom which he never broke
through on any Account, he was preparing to step into
Bed, when, upon opening the Cloaths, to his great
Surprize, he beheld an Infant, wrapt up in some
coarse Linnen, in a sweet and profound Sleep, between
his Sheets. He stood some Time lost in Astonishment
at this Sight ; but, as Good-nature was always the
Ascendant in his Mind, he soon began to be touched
with Sentiments of Compassion for the little Wretch
before him. He then rang his Bell, and ordered an
elderly Woman Servant to rise immediately and come
to him, and in the mean Time was so eager in con-
templating the Beauty of Innocence, appearing in
those lively Colours with which Infancy and Sleep
always display it, that his Thoughts were too much
engaged to reflect that he was in his Shirt, when the
Matron came in. She had indeed given her Master
sufficient Time to dress himself ; for out of Respect
to him, and Regard to Decency, she had spent many
Minutes in adjusting her Hair at the Looking-glass,
notwithstanding all the Hurry in which she had been

393



HENRY FIELDING



summoned by the Servant, and tho' her Master, for
ought she knew, lay expiring in an Apoplexy, or in
some other Fit.

It will not be wondered at, that a Creature, who had
so strict a Regard to Decency in her own Person,
should be shocked at the least Deviation from it in
another. She therefore no sooner opened the Door,
and saw her Master standing by the Bed-side in his
Shirt, with a Candle in his Hand, than she started
back in a most terrible Fright, and might perhaps have
swooned away, had he not now recollected his being
undrest, and put an End to her Terrors, by desiring
her to stay without the Door, till he had thrown some
Cloaths over his Back, and was become incapable of
shocking the pure Eyes of Mrs. Deborah Wtlkins, who,
tho' in the 5 2d Year of her Age, vowed she had never
beheld a Man without his Coat. Sneerers and
prophane Wits may perhaps laugh at her first Fright ;
yet my graver Reader, when he considers the Time of
Night, the Summons from her Bed, and the Situation
in which she found her Master, will highly justify
and applaud her Conduct ; unless the Prudence,
which must be supposed to attend Maidens at that
Period of Life at which Mrs. Deborah had arrived,
should a little lessen his Admiration.

When Mrs. Deborah returned into the Room, and
was acquainted by her Master with the finding the
little Infant, her Consternation was rather greater
than his had been ; nor could she refrain from crying
out, with great Horror of Accent as well as Look,
' My good Sir ! what 's to be done f ' Mr. Allworthy
answered, She must take care of the Child that
Evening, and in the Morning he would give Orders
to provide it a Nurse. ' Yes, Sir,' says she, ' and I

394



HENRY FIELDING



hope your Worship will send out your Warrant to
take up the Hussy its Mother (for she must be one of
the Neighbourhood) and I should be glad to see her
committed to Brideioel, and whipt at the Cart's Tail.
Indeed, such wicked Sluts cannot be too severely
punished. I'll warrant 'tis not her first, by her
Impudence in laying it to your Worship.' ' In laying
it to me, Deborah,' answered Allworthy, ' I can't think
she hath any such Design. I suppose she hath only
taken this Method to provide for her Child ; and truly
I am glad she hath not done worse.'

Tom Jones

256 London ^ver

THE Morning was fair and bright, and we had a
Passage thither [to Gravesend], I think, as pleasant
as can be conceiv'd ; for, take it with all its Advantages,
particularly the number of fine Ships you are always
sure of seeing by the Way, there is nothing to equal
it in all the Rivers of the World. The yards oiDeptford
and of Woolwich are noble Sights ; and give us a just
idea of the great Perfection to which we are arrived in
building those Floating Castles, and the Figure which
we may always make in Europe among the other
Maritime Powers. That of Woolwich, at least, very
strongly imprinted this idea on my Mind ; for, there
was now on the Stocks there the Royal Anne, supposed
to be the largest Ship ever built, and which contains
ten Carriage Guns more than had ever yet equipped
a First-rate.

It is true, perhaps, that there is more of Ostentation
than of real Utility, in ships of this vast and unwieldy
Burthen, which are rarely capable of acting against an

395



HENRY FIELDING



summoned by the Servant, and tho' her Master, for
ought she knew, lay expiring in an Apoplexy, or in
some other Fit.

It will not be wondered at, that a Creature, who had
so strict a Regard to Decency in her own Person,
should be shocked at the least Deviation from it in
another. She therefore no sooner opened the Door,
and saw her Master standing by the Bed-side in his
Shirt, with a Candle in his Hand, than she started
back in a most terrible Fright, and might perhaps have
swooned away, had he not now recollected his being
undrest, and put an End to her Terrors, by desiring
her to stay without the Door, till he had thrown some
Cloaths over his Back, and was become incapable of
shocking the pure Eyes of Mrs. Deborah Wilktns, who,
tho' in the 5 2d Year of her Age, vowed she had never
beheld a Man without his Coat. Sneerers and
prophane Wits may perhaps laugh at her first Fright ;
yet my graver Reader, when he considers the Time of
Night, the Summons from her Bed, and the Situation
in which she found her Master, will highly justify
and applaud her Conduct ; unless the Prudence,
which must be supposed to attend Maidens at that
Period of Life at which Mrs. Deborah had arrived,
should a little lessen his Admiration.

When Mrs. Deborah returned into the Room, and
was acquainted by her Master with the finding the
little Infant, her Consternation was rather greater
than his had been ; nor could she refrain from crying
out, with great Horror of Accent as well as Look,
' My good Sir ! what 's to be done f ' Mr. Alltvorthy
answered, She must take care of the Child that
Evening, and in the Morning he would give Orders
to provide it a Nurse. ' Yes, Sir,' says she, ' and I

394



HENRY FIELDING



hope your Worship will send out your Warrant to
take up the Hussy its Mother (for she must be one of
the Neighbourhood) and I should be glad to see her
committed to Bridewel, and whipt at the Cart's Tail.
Indeed, such wicked Sluts cannot be too severely
punished. I'll warrant 'tis not her first, by her
Impudence in laying it to your Worship.' ' In laying
it to me, Deborah,' answered Allworthy, ' I can't think
she hath any such Design. I suppose she hath only
taken this Method to provide for her Child ; and truly
I am glad she hath not done worse.'

Tom Jones

256 London 'River

THE Morning was fair and bright, and we had a
Passage thither [to Gravesend], I think, as pleasant
as can be conceiv'd ; for, take it with all its Advantages,
particularly the number of fine Ships you are always
sure of seeing by the Way, there is nothing to equal
it in all the Rivers of the World. The yards oiDeptford
and of Woolwich are noble Sights ; and give us a just
idea of the great Perfection to which we are arrived in
building those Floating Castles, and the Figure which
we may always make in Europe among the other
Maritime Powers. That of Woolwich, at least, very
strongly imprinted this idea on my Mind ; for, there
was now on the Stocks there the Royal Anne, supposed
to be the largest Ship ever built, and which contains
ten Carriage Guns more than had ever yet equipped
a First-rate.

It is true, perhaps, that there is more of Ostentation
than of real Utility, in ships of this vast and unwieldy
Burthen, which are rarely capable of acting against an

395



HENRY FIELDING



Enemy ; but if the building such contributes to pre-
serve, among other nations, the Notion of the British
superiority in Naval Affairs, the expence, though very
great, is well incurred, and the Ostentation is laudable
and truly political. Indeed I should be sorry to allow
that Holland, France or Spain, possessed a Vessel
larger and more beautiful than the largest and most
Beautiful of ours ; for this Honour I would always
administer to the Pride of our Sailors, who should
challenge it from all their Neighbours with Truth and
Success. And sure I am, that not our honest Tars
alone, but every Inhabitant of this Island, may exult
in the Comparison, when he considers the King of
Great-Britain as a Maritime Prince, in opposition to
any other Prince in Europe ; but I am not so certain
that the same idea of superiority will result from com-
paring our Land-forces with those of many other
Crowned Heads. In Numbers, they all far exceed us,
and in the Goodness and splendor of their troops, many
Nations, particularly the Germans and French, and
perhaps the Dutch, cast us at a Distance. . .

In our Marine the case is entirely the reverse, and
it must be our own Fault if it doth not continue so ;
for continue so it will, as long as the flourishing State
of our Trade shall support it ; and this support it can
never want, till our Legislature shall cease to give
sufficient attention to the Protection of our Trade,
and our Magistrates want sufficient Power, Ability, and
Honesty to execute the Laws : a circumstance not to
be apprehended, as it cannot happen, till our Senates
and our Benches shall be filled with the blindest
Ignorance, or with the blackest Corruption. . .

We saw likewise several Indiamen just returned from
their Voyage. These are, I believe, the largest and
396



HENRY FIELDING



finest Vessels whiclfare any where employed in Com-
mercial Affairs. The Colliers, likewise, which are very
numerous, and even assemble in Fleets, are Ships of
great bulk ; and, if we descend to those used in the
American, African, and European Trades, and pass
through those which visit our own Coasts, to the small
Craft that lye between Chatham and the Tower, the
whole forms a most pleasing Object to the Eye, as
well as highly warming to the Heart of an Englishman,
who has any Degree of Love for his Country, or can
recognize any effect of the Patriot in his Constitution.

Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon

257 Cat Overboard !

A MOST tragical Incident fell out this day at Sea.
While the Ship was under Sail, but making, as
will appear, no great Way, a Kitten, one of four of
the Feline Inhabitants of the Cabin, fell from the
Window into the Water : an Alarm was immediately
given to the Captain, who was then upon Deck, and
received it with the utmost Concern. He immediately
gave Orders to the Steersman in favour of the poor
Thing, as he called it ; the Sails were instantly
slackened, and all Hands, as the Phrase is, employed to
recover the poor Animal. I was, I own, extremely
surprised at all this ; less, indeed, at the Captain's
extreme Tenderness, than at his conceiving any
Possibility of Success ; for, if Puss had had nine thou-
sand, instead of nine Lives, I concluded they had been
all lost. The Boatswain, however, had more sanguine
Hopes ; for, having stript himself of his Jacket,"
Breeches, and Shirt, he leapt boldly into the Water,
and, to my great Astonishment, in a few Minutes,

397



HENRY FIELDING



returned to the Ship, bearing the motionless Animal
in his Mouth. Nor was this, I observed, a Matter of
such great Difficulty as it appeared to my Ignorance,
and possibly may seem to that of my Fresh-water
Reader : the Kitten was now exposed to Air and Sun
on the Deck, where its Life, of which it retained no
Symptoms, was despaired of by all.

The Captain's humanity, if I may so call it, did not
so totally destroy his Philosophy, as to make him yield
himself up to affliction on this melancholy Occasion.
Having felt his Loss like a Man, he resolved to shew
he could bear it like one ; and, having declared, he
had rather have lost a Cask of Rum or Brandy, betook
himself to threshing at Backgammon with the Portu-
guese Friar, in which innocent Amusement they passed
their leisure hours.

But as I have, perhaps, a little too wantonly en-
deavoured to raise the tender Passions of my Readers,
in this Narrative, I should think myself unpardonable
if I concluded it, without giving them the Satisfaction
of hearing that the Kitten at last recovered, to the
great Joy of the good Captain.

Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon

WILLIAM PITT, EARL OF
CHATHAM

1708-1778

258 On the Employment of e I(ed Indians
in the ^American War

I CALL upon that right reverend bench, those
holy ministers of the Gospel, and pious pastors of
our Church — I conjure them to join in the holy work,
398



WILLIAM PITT

and vindicate the religion of their God. I appeal
to the wisdom and the law of this learned bench to
defend and support the justice of their country. I call
upon the bishops to interpose the unsullied sanctity
of their lawn ; upon the learned judges to interpose
the purity of their ermine, to save us from this pollu-
tion. I call upon the honour of your lordships to
reverence the dignity of your ancestors, and to main-
tain your own. I call upon the spirit and humanity
of my country to vindicate the national character.
I invoke the genius of the Constitution. From the
tapestry that adorns these walls the immortal ancestor
of this noble lord [Lord Suffolk] frowns with indigna-
tion at the disgrace of his country. In vain he led
your victorious fleets against the boasted Armada of
Spain ; in vain he defended and established the
honour, the liberties, the religion — the Protestant
religion — of this country, against the arbitrary cruelties
of Popery and the Inquisition, if these more than
Popish cruelties and inquisitorial practices are let
loose among us — to turn forth into our settlements,
among our ancient connexions, friends, and relations,
the merciless cannibal, thirsting for the blood of man,
woman, and child ! to send forth the infidel savage —
against whom ? against your Protestant brethren ; to
lay waste their country, to desolate their dwellings,
and extirpate their race and name with these horrible
hell-hounds of savage war ! — hell-hounds, I say, of
savage war ! Spain armed herself with blood-hounds
to extirpate the wretched natives of America, and we
improve on the inhuman example even of Spanish
cruelty ; we turn loose these savage hell-hounds
against our brethren and countrymen in America,
of the same language, laws, liberties, and religion,

399



WILLIAM PITT



endeared to us by every tie that should sanctify
humanity. . .

My lords, I am old and weak, and at present unable
to say more ; but my feelings and indignation were
too strong to have said less. I could not have slept
this night in my bed, nor reposed my head on my
pillow, without giving this vent to my eternal abhor-
rence of such preposterous and enormous principles.

Speech in the House of Lords, 20 November, zjyy

SAMUEL JOHNSON

1709-1784

259 The Last ' Idler '

Saturday, April 5 [1760]

MUCH of the Pain and Pleasure of mankind
arises from the conjectures which every one
makes of the thoughts of others ; we all enjoy praise
which we do not hear, and resent contempt which we
do not see. The Idler may therefore be forgiven, if
he suffers his Imagination to represent to him what his
readers will say or think when they are informed that
they have now his last paper in their hands.

Value is more frequently raised by scarcity than by
use. That which lay neglected when it was common,
rises in estimation as its quantity becomes less. We
seldom learn the true want of what we have till it
is discovered that we can have no more.

This essay will, perhaps, be read with care even by
those who have not yet attended to any other ; and
he that finds this late attention recompensed, will not
forbear to wish that he had bestowed it sooner.
Though the Idler and his readers have contracted
400



SAMUEL JOHNSON

no close friendship they are perhaps both unwilling
to part. There are few things not purely evil, of which
we can say, without some emotion of uneasiness, this
is the last. Those who never could agree together,
shed tears when mutual discontent has determined
them to final separation ; of a place which has been
frequently visited, tho' without pleasure, the last look
is taken with heaviness of heart ; and the Idler, with
all his chilness of tranquillity, is not wholly unaffected
by the thought that his last essay is now before him.

This secret honour of the last is inseparable from
a thinking being whose life is limited, and to whom
death is dreadful. We always make a secret comparison
between a part and the whole ; the termination of
any period of life reminds us that life itself has like-
wise its termination ; when we have done any thing
for the last time, we involuntarily reflect that a part of
the days allotted us is past, and that as more is past
there is less remaining.

It is very happily and kindly provided, that in every
life there are certain pauses and interruptions, which
force consideration upon the careless, and seriousness
upon the light ; points of time where one course of
action ends and another begins ; and by vicissitude
of fortune, or alteration of employment, by change of
place, or loss of friendship, we are forced to say of
something, this is the last.

An even and unvaried tenour of life always hides
from our apprehension the approach of its end.
Succession is not perceived but by variation ; he that
lives to day as he lived yesterday, and expects that, as
the present day is, such will be the morrow, easily con-
ceives time as running in a circle and returning to itself.
The uncertainty of our duration is impressed commonly

401



SAMUEL JOHNSON

by dissimilitude of condition ; it is only by finding life
changeable that we are reminded of its shortness.

This conviction, however forcible at every new
impression, is every moment fading from the mind ;
and partly by the inevitable incursion of new images,
and partly by voluntary exclusion of unwelcome
thoughts, we are again exposed to the universal fallacy ;
and we must do another thing for the last time, before
we consider that the time is nigh when we shall do
no more. . .

The Idler, No. 103

260 The idviator

A MONG the artists that had been allured into the
,/JL happy valley, to labour for the accommodation
and pleasure of its inhabitants, was a man eminent for
his knowledge of the mechanick powers, who had
contrived many engines both of use and recreation. . .

This artist was sometimes visited by Rasselas, who
was pleased with every kind of knowledge, imagining
that the time would come when all his acquisitions
should be of use to him in the open world. He came
one day to amuse himself in his usual manner, and
found the master busy in building a sailing chariot :
he saw that the design was practicable upon a level
surface, and with expressions of great esteem solicited
its completion. The workman was pleased to find
himself so much regarded by the prince, and resolved
to gain yet higher honours. ' Sir, said he, you have
seen but a small part of what the mechanick sciences
can perform. I have been long of opinion, that,
instead of the tardy conveyance of ships and chariots,
man might use the swifter migration of wings ; that
402



SAMUEL JOHNSON

the fields of air are open to knowledge, and that only
ignorance and idleness need crawl upon the ground.'

This hint rekindled the prince's desire of passing
the mountains ; having seen what the mechanist had
already performed, he was willing to fancy that he
could do more ; yet resolved to enquire further before
he suffered hope to afflict him by disappointment.
' I am afraid, said he to the artist, that your imagina-
tion prevails over your skill, and that you now tell me
rather what you wish than what you know. Every
animal has his element assigned him ; the birds have
the air, and man and beasts the earth.' ' So, replied
the mechanist, fishes have the water, in which yet
beasts can swim by nature, and men by art. He that
can swim needs not despair to fly : to swim is to fly
in a grosser fluid, and to fly is to swim in a subtler.
We are only to proportion our power of resistance to
the different density of matter through which we are
to pass. You will be necessarily upborn by the air, if
you can renew any impulse upon it, faster than the
air can recede from the pressure.'

' But the exercise of swimming, said the prince,
is very laborious ; the strongest limbs are soon wearied ;
I am afraid the act of flying will be yet more violent,
and wings will be of no great use, unless we can fly
further than we can swim.'

' Nothing, replied the artist, will ever be attempted,
if all possible objections must be first overcome. If
you will favour my project I will try the first flight
at my own hazard. I have considered the structure
of all volant animals, and find the folding continuity
of the bat's wings most easily accommodated to the
human form. Upon this model I shall begin my task
to morrow, and in a year expect to tower into the air

403



SAMUEL JOHNSON

beyond the malice or pursuit of man. But I will
work only on this condition, that the art shall not be
divulged, and that you shall not require me to make
wings for any but ourselves.'

' Why, said Rasselas, should you envy others so
great an advantage ? All skill ought to be exerted for
universal good ; every man has owed much to others,
and ought to repay the kindness that he has received.'

' If men were all virtuous, returned the artist, I
should with great alacrity teach them all to fly. But
what would be the security of the good, if the bad
could at pleasure invade them from the sky ? Against
an army sailing through the clouds neither walls, nor
mountains, nor seas, could afford any security. A
flight of northern savages might hover in the wind, and
light at once with irresistible violence upon the capital
of a fruitful region that was rolling under them.
Even this valley, the retreat of princes, the abode of
happiness, might be violated by the sudden descent
of some of the naked nations that swarm on the coast
of the southern sea.'

The prince promised secrecy, and waited for the
performance, not wholly hopeless of success. He
visited the work from time to time, observed its
progress, and remarked many ingenious contrivances to
facilitate motion, and unite levity with strength. The
artist was every day more certain that he should leave
vultures and eagles behind him, and the contagion of
his confidence seized upon the prince.

In a year the wings were finished, and, on a morning
appointed, the maker appeared furnished for flight
on a little promontory : he waved his pinions a while
to gather air, then leaped from his stand, and in an
instant dropped into the lake. His wings, which were
404



SAMUEL JOHNSON

of no use in the air, sustained him in the water, and
the prince drew him to land, half dead with terrour and
vexation.

Iiasselas

261 tPope and Dryden

HE professed to have learned his poetry from
Dryden, whom, whenever an opportunity was
presented, he praised through his whole life with
unvaried liberality ; and perhaps his character may
receive some illustration if he be compared with his
master.

Integrity of understanding and nicety of discern-
ment were not allotted in a less proportion to Dryden
than to Pope. The rectitude of Dryden's mind was
sufficiently shewn by the dismission of his poetical
prejudices, and the rejection of unnatural thoughts
and rugged numbers. But Dryden never desired to
apply all the judgement that he had. He wrote, and
professed to write, merely for the people ; and when
he pleased others, he contented himself. He spent
no time in struggles to rouse latent powers ; he never
attempted to make that better which was already
good, nor often to mend what he must have known
to be faulty. He wrote, as he tells us, with very little
consideration ; when occasion or necessity called upon
him, he poured out what the present moment happened
to supply, and, when once it had passed the press,
ejected it from his mind ; for when he had no pecuniary
interest, he had no further solicitude.

Pope was not content to satisfy ; he desired to
excel, and therefore always endeavoured to do his
best : he did not court the candour, but dared the
judgement of his reader, and, expecting no indulgence

4°5



SAMUEL JOHNSON

from others, he shewed none to himself. He examined
lines and words with minute and punctilious observa-
tion, and retouched every part with indefatigable
diligence, till he had left nothing to be forgiven. . .

Of genius, that power which constitutes a poet ;
that quality without which judgement is cold and
knowledge is inert ; that energy which collects, com-
bines, amplifies, and animates — the superiority must,
with some hesitation, be allowed to Dryden. It is
not to be inferred that of this poetical vigour Pope
had only a little, because Dryden had more ; for every
other writer since Milton must give place to Pope ;
and even of Dryden it must be said that if he has
brighter paragraphs, he has not better poems. Dryden's
performances were always hasty, either excited by
some external occasion, or extorted by domestick
necessity ; he composed without consideration, and
published without correction. What his mind could
supply at call, or gather in one excursion, was all that
he sought, and all that he gave. The dilatory caution
of Pope enabled him to condense his sentiments, to
multiply his images, and to accumulate all that study
might produce, or chance might supply. If the flights
of Dryden therefore are higher, Pope continues
longer on the wing. If of Dryden's fire the blaze is
brighter, of Pope's the heat is more regular and
constant. Dryden often surpasses expectation, and
Pope never falls below it. Dryden is read with frequent
astonishment, and Pope with perpetual delight.

Lives of the Poets



406



SAMUEL JOHNSON



262 William Qollins

HE now (about 1744) came to London a literary
adventurer, with many projects in his head,
and very little money in his pocket. He designed
many works, but his great fault was irresolution, or
the frequent calls of immediate necessity broke his
schemes, and suffered him to pursue no settled pur-
pose. A man, doubtful of his dinner, or trembling
at a creditor, is not much disposed to abstracted
meditation or remote enquiries. He published pro-
posals for a History of the Revival of Learning, and
I have heard him speak with great kindness of Leo the
Tenth, and with keen resentment of his tasteless
successor. But probably not a page of the History
was ever written. He planned several tragedies, but
he only planned them. He wrote now and then
odes and other poems, and did something, however
little.

About this time I fell into his company. His appear-
ance was decent and manly ; his knowledge consider-
able, his views extensive, his conversation elegant, and
his disposition chearful. By degrees I gained his
confidence ; and one day was admitted to him when
he was immured by a bailiff that was prowling in
the street. On this occasion recourse was had to the
booksellers, who, on the credit of a translation of
Aristotle's Poeticks, which he engaged to write with
a large commentary, advanced as much money as
enabled him to escape into the country. He shewed
me the guineas safe in his hand. Soon afterwards
his uncle, Mr. Martin, a lieutenant-colonel, left him
about two thousand pounds ; a sum which Collins

407



SAMUEL JOHNSON

could scarcely think exhaustible, and which he did
not live to exhaust. The guineas were then repaid,
and the translation neglected.

But man is not born for happiness. Collins, who,
while he studied to live, felt no evil but poverty,
no sooner lived to study than his life was assailed by
more dreadful calamities, disease and insanity. . .

Such was the fate of Collins, with whom I once
delighted to converse, and whom I yet remember
with tenderness.

Ltves of the Poets

263 Qongregational <£Music

AS we sat at Sir Alexander's table, we were enter -
±\. tained, according to the ancient usage of the North,
with the melody of the bagpipe. Every thing in these
countries has its history. As the bagpiper was playing,
an elderly Gentleman informed us, that in some remote
time, the Macdonalds of Glengary having been injured,
or offended by the inhabitants of Culloden, and
resolving to have justice or vengeance, came to
Culloden on a Sunday, where finding their enemies
at worship, they shut them up in the church, which
they set on fire ; and this, said he, is the tune that the
piper played while they were burning.

Narrations like this, however uncertain, deserve the
notice of a traveller, because they are the only records
of a nation that has no historians, and afford the most
genuine representation of the life and character of the
ancient Highlanders.

journey to the Western Islands



408



SAMUEL JOHNSON



264 On his Dictionary

IN hope of giving longevity to that which its own
nature forbids to be immortal, I have devoted
this book, the labour of years, to the honour of my
country, that we may no longer yield the palm of
philology, without a contest, to the nations of the
continent. The chief glory of every people arises
from its authours : whether I shall add any thing by
my own writings to the reputation of English literature,
must be left to time : much of my life has been
lost' under the pressures of disease; much has been
trifled away ; and much has always been spent in
provision for the day that was passing over me ; but
I shall not think my employment useless or ignoble,
if by my assistance foreign nations, and distant ages,
gain access to the propagators of knowledge, and
understand the teachers of truth ; if my labours afford
light to the repositories of science, and add celebrity
to Bacon, to Hooker, to Milton, and to Boyle.

When I am animated by this wish, I look with
pleasure on my book, however defective, and deliver
it to the world with the spirit of a man that has
endeavoured well. That it will immediately become
popular I have not promised to myself : a few wild
blunders, and risible absurdities, from which no work
of such multiplicity was ever free, may for a time
furnish folly with laughter, and harden ignorance in
contempt ; but useful diligence will at last prevail,
and there never can be wanting some who distinguish
desert ; who will consider that no dictionary of a living
tongue ever can be perfect, since, while it is hastening
to publication, some words are budding, and some

409



SAMUEL JOHNSON

falling away ; that a whole life cannot be spent upon
syntax and etymology, and that even a whole life
would not be sufficient ; that he, whose design includes
whatever language can express, must often speak of
what he does not understand ; that a writer will
sometimes be hurried by eagerness to the end, and
sometimes faint with weariness under a task, which
Scaliger compares to the labours of the anvil and the
mine ; that what is obvious is not always known, and
what is known is not always present ; that sudden fits
of inadvertency will surprize vigilance, slight avocations
will seduce attention, and casual eclipses of the irlind
will darken learning ; and that the writer shall often
in vain trace his memory at the moment of need, for
that which yesterday he knew with intuitive readiness,
and which will come uncalled into his thoughts
to-morrow.

In this work, when it shall be found that much is
omitted, let it not be forgotten that much likewise
is performed ; and though no book was ever spared out
of tenderness to the authour, and the world is little
solicitous to know whence proceeded the faults of
that which it condemns ; yet it may gratify curiosity
to inform it, that the English Dictionary was written
with little assistance of the learned, and without any
patronage of the great ; not in the soft obscurities
of retirement, or under the shelter of academick
bowers, but amidst inconvenience and distraction, in
sickness and in sorrow. It may repress the triumph
of malignant criticism to observe, that if our language
is not here fully displayed, I have only failed in an
attempt which no human powers have hitherto com-
pleted. If the lexicons of ancient tongues, now
410



SAMUEL JOHNSON

immutably fixed, and comprised in a few volumes, be
yet, after the toil of successive ages, inadequate and
delusive ; if the aggregated knowledge, and co-
operating diligence of the Italian academicians, did
not secure them from the censure of Beni ; if the
embodied criticks of France, when fifty years had been
spent upon their work, were obliged to change its
ceconomy, and give their second edition another
form, I may surely be contented without the praise
of perfection, which, if I could obtain, in this gloom of
solitude, what would it avail me? I have protracted
my work till most of those whom I wished to please
have sunk into the grave, and success and miscarriage
are empty sounds : I therefore dismiss it with frigid
tranquillity, having little to fear or hope from censure
or from praise.

Preface to the English Dictionary

265 Letter to Lord Chesterfield

To the Right Honourable the Earl of Chesterfield.

MY LORD, February 7, 1755.

I HAVE been lately informed, by the pro-
prietor of the World, that two papers, in which my
Dictionary is recommended to the pubhck, were written
byyour Lordship. Tobe so distinguished,is an honour,
which, being very little accustomed to favours from
the great, I know not well how to receive, or in what
terms to acknowledge.

When, upon some slight encouragement, I first
visited your Lordship, I was overpowered, like the
rest of mankind, by the enchantment of your address ;

411



SAMUEL JOHNSON

and could not forbear to wish that I might boast
myself Le vainqueur du vainqueur de la terre ; — that
I might obtain that regard for which I saw the world
contending ; but I found my attendance so little
encouraged, that neither pride nor modesty would suffer
me to continue it. When I had once addressed your
Lordship in publick, I had exhausted all the art of
pleasing which a retired and uncourtly scholar can
possess. I had done all that I could; and no man is
well pleased to have his all neglected, be it ever so
little.

Seven years, my Lord, have now past, since I waited
in your outward rooms, or was repulsed from your
door ; during which time I have been pushing on
my work through difficulties, of which it is useless to
complain, and have brought it, at last, to the verge
of publication, without one act of assistance, one word
of encouragement, or one smile of favour. Such treat-
ment I did not expect, for I never had a Patron
before.

The shepherd in Virgil grew at last acquainted
with Love, and found him a native of the rocks.

Is not a Patron, my Lord, one who looks with
unconcern on a man struggling for life in the water,
and, when he has reached ground, encumbers him with
help? The notice which you have been pleased to
take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind ;
but it has been delayed till I am indifferent, and cannot
enjoy it ; till I am solitary, and cannot impart it ;
till I am known, and do not want it. I hope it is no
very cynical asperity not to confess obligations where
no benefit has been received, or to be unwilling
that the publick should consider me as owing that to
41a



SAMUEL JOHNSON

a Patron, which Providence has enabled me to do
for myself.

Having carried on my work thus far with so little
obligation to any favourer of learning, I shall not be
disappointed though I should conclude it, if less be
possible, with less ; for I have been long wakened from
that dream of hope, in which I once boasted myself
with so much exultation,
My Lord,

Your Lordship's most humble,
Most obedient servant,

Sam. Johnson.

WILLIAM MELMOTH

1710-1799

266 The Source of the Qlttumnus
(Pliny to Romanus)

HAVE you ever seen the source of the river
Clitumnus ? As I never heard you mention it, I
imagine not ; let me therefore advise you to do so im-
mediately. It is but lately indeed I had that pleasure,
and I condemn myself for not having seen it sooner.
At the foot of a little hill, covered with venerable
and shady cypress-trees, a spring issues out, which
gushing in different and unequal streams, forms
itself, after several windings, into a spacious bason,
so extremely clear, that you may see the pebbles,
and the little pieces of money which are thrown into
it, as they lie at the bottom. From thence it is carried
off not so much by the declivity of the ground, as by
its own strength and fulness. It is navigable almost
as soon as it has quitted its source, and wide enough

413



WILLIAM MELMOTH



to admit a free passage for ships to pass by each
other, as they sail with or against the stream. The
current runs so strong, tho' the ground is level, that
the vessels which go down the river have no occa-
sion to make use of their oars ; while those which
ascend, find it difficult to advance, even with the
assistance of oars and poles : and this vicissitude of
labor and ease, is exceedingly amusing when one sails
up and down merely for pleasure. The banks on each
side are shaded with the verdure of great numbers
of ash and poplar trees, as clearly and distinctly seen
in the stream, as if they were actually sunk in it. The
water is cold as snow, and as white too. Near it stands
an antient and venerable temple, wherein is placed
the river-god Clitumnus cloathed in a robe, whose
immediate presence the prophetic oracles here
delivered, sufficiently testify. Several little chapels
are scattered round, dedicated to particular gods
distinguished by different names, and some of them
too presiding over different fountains. For, besides
the principal one, which is, as it were, the parent of
all the rest, there are several other lesser streams,
which, taking their rise from various sources, lose
themselves in the river ; over which a bridge is built,
that separates the sacred part from that which lies
open to common use. Vessels are allowed to come
over this bridge, but no person is permitted to swim,
except below it. The Hispellates, to whom Augustus
gave this place, furnish a public bath and likewise
entertain all strangers, at their own expence. Several
villas, attracted by the beauty of this river, are situated
upon its borders. In short, every object that presents
itself will afford you entertainment. You may also
414



WILLIAM MELMOTH



amuse yourself with numberless inscriptions, that are
fixed upon the pillars and walls by different persons,
celebrating the virtues of the fountain, and the
divinity that presides over it. There are many of
them you will greatly admire, as there are some that
will make you laugh : but I must correct myself
when I say so ; you are too humane, I know, to laugh
upon such an occasion. Farewel.

Translation of Pliny's Letters

DAVID HUME

1711-1776

267 Delicacy of 'Taste and Delicacy
of 'Passion

THERE is a certain Delicacy of Passion to which
some People are subject that makes them extremely
sensible to all the Accidents of Life, and gives them
a lively Joy upon every prosperous Event, as well as
a piercing Grief when they meet with Crosses and
Adversity. Favours and Good offices easily engage
their Friendship, while the smallest Injury provokes
their Resentment. Any Honour or Mark of Distinc-
tion elevates them above Measure ; but they are as
sensibly touched with Contempt. People of this
Character have, no doubt, more lively Enjoyments, as
well as more pungent Sorrows, than Men of more cool
and sedate Tempers. But, I believe, when every
Thing is balanced, there is no one that would not
rather chuse to be of the latter Character, were he
entirely Master of his own Disposition. Good or ill
Fortune is very little at our Disposal : And when

41s



DAVID HUME



a Person that has this Sensibility of Temper meets
with any Misfortune, his Sorrow or Resentment takes
entire Possession of him, and deprives him of all Relish
in the common Occurrences of Life, the right Enjoy-
ment of which forms the greatest Part of our Happi-
ness. Great Pleasures are much less frequent than
great Pains, so that a sensible Temper must meet with
fewer Trials in the former Way than in the latter. Not
to mention, that Men of such lively Passions are apt
to be transported beyond all Bounds of Prudence and
Discretion, and take false Steps in the Conduct of
Life, which are often irretrievable.

There is a Delicacy of Taste observable in some Men,
which very much resembles this Delicacy of Passion,
and produces the same Sensibility to Beauty and
Deformity of every Kind, as that does to Prosperity
and Adversity, Obligations and Injuries. When you
present a Poem or a Picture to a Man possessed of
this Talent, the Delicacy of his Feeling or Sentiments
makes him be touched very sensibly by every Part of
it ; nor are the masterly Strokes perceived with a
more exquisite Relish and Satisfaction, than the
Negligences or Absurdities with Disgust and Uneasi-
ness. A polite and judicious Conversation affords him
the highest Entertainment. Rudeness or Impertinence
is as great a Punishment to him. In short, Delicacy
of Taste has the same Effect as Delicacy of Passion :
It enlarges the Sphere both of our Happiness and
Misery, and makes us sensible of Pains as well as
Pleasures that escape the rest of Mankind.

I believe, however, there is no one who will not
agree with me, that notwithstanding this Resemblance,
a Delicacy of Taste is as much to be desired and
416



DAVID HUME



cultivated, as a Delicacy of Passion is to be lamented,
and to be remedied, if possible. The good or ill
Accidents of Life are very little at our Disposal : But
we are pretty much Masters what Books we shall read,
what Diversions we shall partake of, and what Company
we shall keep. The ancient Philosophers endeavoured
to render Happiness entirely independent of every
Thing external. That is impossible to be attained :
But every wise Man will endeavour to place his
Happiness on such Objects as depend most upon him-
self ; And that is not to be attained so much by any
other Means as by this Delicacy of Sentiment. When
a Man is possessed of that Talent, he is more happy
by what pleases his Taste, than by what gratifies his
Appetites, and receives more Enjoyment from a Poem,
or a Piece of Reasoning, than the most expensive
Luxury can afford.

Essays

268 Foreign Trade

IF we consult history, we shall find, that in most
nations foreign trade has preceded any refinement
in home manufactures, and given birth to domestic
luxury. The temptation is stronger to make use
of foreign commodities which are ready for use, and
which are entirely new to us, than to make improve-
ments on any domestic commodity, which always
advance by slow degrees, and never affect us by their
novelty. The profit is also very great in exporting
what is superfluous at home, and what bears no price,
to foreign nations whose soil or climate is not favourable
to that commodity. Thus men become acquainted
with the pleasures of luxury, and the profits of
2830 p 417



DAVID HUME

commerce ; and their delicacy and industry being once
awakened, carry them on to farther improvements
in every branch of domestic as well as foreign trade ;
and this perhaps is the chief advantage which arises
from a commerce with strangers. It rouses men from
their indolence ; and, presenting the gayer and more
opulent part of the nation with objects of luxury which
they never before dreamed of, raises in them a desire
of a more splendid way of life than what their ancestors
enjoyed. And at the same time, the few merchants
who possess the secret of this importation and ex-
portation, make great profits ; and, becoming rivals
in wealth to the ancient nobility, tempt other adven-
turers to become their rivals in commerce. Imitation
soon diffuses all those arts, while domestic manufac-
turers emulate the foreign in their improvements,
and work up every home commodity to the utmost
perfection of which it is susceptible. Their own steel
and iron, in such laborious hands, become equal to
the gold and rubies of the Indies.

Essays



LAURENCE STERNE

1713-1768

269 Consolations of 'Philosophy

NOW let us go back to my brother's death.
Philosophy has a fine saying for every thing. —
For Death it has an entire set ; the misery was, they
all at once rushed into my father's head, that 'twas
difficult to string them together, so as to make any
thing of a consistent show out of them. — He took
them as they came.

' 'Tis an inevitable chance — the first statute in



418



LAURENCE STERNE



Magna Charta — it is an everlasting act of parliament,
my dear brother, — All must die.

' If my son could not have died, it had been matter
of wonder, — not that he is dead.

' Monarchs and princes dance in the same ring
with us.

' — To die, is the great debt and tribute due unto
nature : tombs and monuments, which should per-
petuate our memories, pay it themselves ; and the
proudest pyramid of them all, which wealth and science
have erected, has lost its apex, and stands obtruncated
in the traveller's horizon.' (My father found he got
great ease, and went on) — ' Kingdoms and provinces,
and towns and cities, have they not their periods?
and when those principles and powers, which at first
cemented and put them together, have performed
their several evolutions, they fall back.' — Brother
Shandy, said my uncle Toby, laying down his pipe
at the word evolutions — Revolutions, I meant, quoth
my father, — by heaven ! I meant revolutions, brother
Toby — evolutions is nonsense. — 'Tis not nonsense —
said my uncle Toby. — But is it not nonsense to break
the thread of such a discourse upon such an occasion ?
cried my father — do not — dear Toby, continued he,
taking him by the hand, do not — do not, I beseech
thee, interrupt me at this crisis. — My uncle Toby
put his pipe into his mouth.

' Where is Troy and Mycenae, and Thebes and Delos,
and Persepohs and Agngentum ? ' — continued my
father, taking up his book of post-roads, which he
had laid down. — ' What is become, brother Toby, of
Nineveh and Babylon, of Cizicum and Mitylenae ?
The fairest towns that ever the sun rose upon, are now
no more ; the names only are left, and those (for many

419



LAURENCE STERNE



of them are wrong spelt) are falling themselves by
piece-meals to decay, and in length of time will be
forgotten, and involved with every thing in a perpetual
night : the world itself, brother Toby, must — must
come to an end.

' Returning out of Asia, when I sailed from Aegina
towards Megara' (when can this have been ? thought
my uncle Toby) ' I began to view the country round
about. Aegina was behind me, Megara was before,
Pyraeus on the right hand, Corinth on the left. — What
flourishing towns now prostrate upon the earth ! Alas !
alas ! said I to myself, that man should disturb his
soul for the loss of a child, when so much as this lies
awfully buried in his presence — Remember, said I to
myself again — remember thou art a man.' —

Now my uncle Toby knew not that this last para-
graph was an extract of Servius Sulpicius's consolatory
letter to Tully. — He had as little skill, honest man, in
the fragments, as he had in the whole pieces of anti-
quity. — And as my father, whilst he was concerned in
the Turkey trade, had been three or four different
times in the Levant, in one of which he had stayed
a whole year and an half at Zant, my uncle Toby
naturally concluded, that, in some one of these periods,
he had taken a trip across the Archipelago, into Asia ;
and that all this sailing affair with Aegina behind, and
Megara before, and Pyraeus on the right hand, etc.
etc., was nothing more than the true course of my
father's voyage and reflections. — 'Twas certainly in
his manner, and many an undertaking critick would
have built two stories higher upon worse foundations.
— And pray, brother, quoth my uncle Toby, laying
the end of his pipe upon my father's hand in a kindly
way of interruption — but waiting till he finished the
420



LAURENCE STERNE



account — what year of our Lord was this f — 'Twas no
year of our Lord, replied my father. — That 's im-
possible, cried my uncle Toby. — Simpleton ! said my
father, — 'twas forty years before Christ was born.

My uncle Toby had but two things for it ; either to
suppose his brother to be the wandering Jew, or that
his misfortunes had disordered his brain. — ' May the
Lord God of heaven and earth protect him and restore
him,' said my uncle Toby, praying silently for my
father, and with tears in his eyes.

— My father placed the tears to a proper account,
and went on with his harangue with great spirit.

Tristram Shandy

2jo Trim's Hat




Y young master in London is dead ! said Oba-
. diah. —



A green sattin night-gown of my mother's,

which had been twice scoured, was the first idea which
Obadtah's exclamation brought into Susannah's head.
— Well might Locke write a chapter upon the imper-
fections of words. — Then, quoth Susannah, we must
all go into mourning. — But note a second time : the
word mourning, notwithstanding Susannah made use
of it herself — failed also of doing its office ; it excited
not one single idea, tinged either with grey or black,
— all was green. — The green sattin night-gown hung
there still.

— O ! 'twill be the death of my poor mistress, cried
Susannah. — My mother's whole wardrobe followed.
— What a procession ! her red damask, — her orange
tawny, — her white and yellow lute strings, — her brown
taffata, — her bone-laced caps, her bed-gowns, and

421



LAURENCE STERNE



comfortable under-petticoats. — Not a rag was left
behind. — ' No, — she will never look up again,'' said
Susannah.

We had a fat, foolish scullion — my father, I think,
kept her for her simplicity ; — she had been all autumn
struggling with a dropsy. — He is dead, said Obadtah,
— he is certainly dead ! — So am not I, said the foolish
scullion.

— Here is sad news, Trim ! cried Susannah, wiping
her eyes as Trim stepped into the kitchen, — master
Bobby is dead and buried — the funeral was an inter-
polation of Susannah's — we shall have all to go into
mourning, said Susannah.

I hope not, said Trim. — You hope not ! cried
Susannah earnestly. — The mourning ran not in Trim's
head, whatever it did in Susannah's. — I hope — said
Trim, explaining himself, I hope in God the news is
not true. — I heard the letter read with my own ears,
answered Obadiah ; and we shall have a terrible piece
of work of it in stubbing the ox-moor. — Oh ! he 's
dead, said Susannah. — As sure, said the scullion, as
I'm alive.

I lament for him from my heart and my soul, said
Trim, fetching a sigh. — Poor creature ! — poor boy ! —
poor gentleman !

— He was alive last Whitsuntide ! said the coach-
man. — Whitsuntide ! alas ! cried Trim, extending his
right arm, and falling instantly into the same attitude
in which he read the sermon, — What is Whitsuntide,
Jonathan (for that was the coachman's name), or
Shrovetide, or any tide or time past, to this f Are we
not here now, continued the corporal (striking the end
of his stick perpendicularly upon the floor, so as to
give an idea of health and stability) — and are we not —
422



LAURENCE STERNE

(dropping his hat upon the ground) gone ! in a moment !
— 'Twas infinitely striking ! Susannah burst into a
flood of tears. — We are not stocks and stones. —
Jonathan, Obadiah, the cook-maid, all melted. — The
foolish fat scullion herself, who was scouring a fish-
kettle upon her knees, was roused with it. — The whole
kitchen crowded about the corporal. . .

There was nothing in the sentence — 'twas one of
your self-evident truths we have the advantage of
hearing every day ; and if Trim had not trusted more
to his hat than his head — he had made nothing at all
of it.

■' Are we not here now ; ' continued the cor-
poral, ' and are we not ' — (dropping his hat plumb
upon the ground — and pausing before he pronounced
the word) — ' gone ! in a moment f ' The descent of
the hat was as if a heavy lump of clay had been kneaded
into the crown of it. — Nothing could have expressed
the sentiment of mortality, of which it was the type
and forerunner, like it, — his hand seemed to vanish
from under it, — it fell dead, — the corporal's eye fixed
upon it, as upon a corpse, — and Susannah burst into
a flood of tears.

Now — Ten thousand, and ten thousand times ten
thousand (for matter and motion are infinite) are the
ways by which a hat may be dropped upon the ground,
without any effect. — Had he flung it, or thrown it, or
cast it, or skimmed it, or squirted it, or let it slip or
fall in any possible direction under heaven,— or in
the best direction that could be given to it, — had he
dropped it like a goose — like a puppy — like an ass — or
in doing it, or even after he had done, had he looked
like a fool — like a ninny — like a nincompoop — it had
failed, and the effect upon the heart had been lost.

423



LAURENCE STERNE



Ye who govern this mighty world and its mighty-
concerns with the engines of eloquence, — who heat
it, and cool it, and melt it, and mollify it, — and then
harden it again to your purpose —

Ye who wind and turn the passions with this great
windlass, and, having done it, lead the owners of them,
whither ye think meet —

Ye, lastly, who drive — and why not, Ye also who are
driven, like turkeys to market with a stick and a red
clout — meditate — meditate, I beseech you, upon
Trim's hat.

Tristram Shandy

2ji Death of Le Fever

THE sun looked bright the morning after, to every
eye in the village but Le Fever's and his afflicted
son's ; the hand of death pressed heavy upon his
eye-lids, — and hardly could the wheel at the cistern
turn round its circle, — when my uncle Toby, who had
rose up an hour before his wonted time, entered the
lieutenant's room, and without preface or apology,
sat himself down upon the chair by the bed-side, and,
independently of all modes and customs, opened the
curtain in the manner an old friend and brother officer
would have done it, and asked him how he did, — how
he had rested in the night, — what was his complaint, —
where was his pain, — and what he could do to help
him : — and without giving him time to answer any
one of the enquiries, went on, and told him of the
little plan which he had been concerting with the
corporal the night before for him. —

— You shall go home directly, Le Fever, said my
uncle Toby, to my house, — and we'll send for a doctor
424



LAURENCE STERNE



to see what 's the matter, — and we'll have an apothe-
cary, — and the corporal shall be your nurse ; — and
I'll be your servant, Le Fever.

There was a frankness in my uncle Toby, — not the
effect of familiarity, — but the cause of it, — which let
you at once into his soul, and shewed you the goodness
of his nature ; to this, there was something in his looks,
and voice, and manner, superadded, which eternally
beckoned to the unfortunate to come and take shelter
under him ; so that before my uncle Toby had half
finished the kind offers he was making to the father,
had the son insensibly pressed up close to his knees,
and had taken hold of the breast of his coat, and was
pulling it towards him. — The blood and spirits of Le
Fever, which were waxing cold and slow within him,
and were retreating to their last citadel, the heart —
rallied back, — the film forsook his eyes for a moment,
— he looked up wishfully in my uncle Toby's face, —
then cast a look upon his boy, — and that ligament, fine
as it was, — was never broken.

Tristram Shandy

272 Nannette

I 'WAS in the road betwixt Nismes and Lunel, where
JL there is the best Muscatto wine in all France,
and which by the bye belongs to the honest canons
of Montpellier — and foul befall the man who has
drank it at their table, who grudges them a drop of it.

— The sun was set — they had done their work ; the
nymphs had tied up their hair afresh — and the swains
were preparing for a carousal — My mule made a dead
point — 'Tis the fife and tabourin, said I — I'm fright-
ened to death, quoth he. . . 'Tis very well, sir, said I —
I never will argue a point with one of your family,

42s



LAURENCE STERNE



as long as I live ; so leaping off his back, and kicking
off one boot into this ditch, and t'other into that — I'll
take a dance, said I — so stay you here.

A sun-burnt daughter of Labour rose up from the
groupe to meet me, as I advanced towards them ; her
hair, which was a dark chestnut approaching rather to
a black, was tied up in a knot, all but a single tress.

We want a cavalier, said she, holding out both her
hands, as if to offer them — And a cavalier ye shall
have ; said I, taking hold of both of them.

Hadst thou, Nannette, been arrayed like a duchess !
— But that cursed slit in thy petticoat !

Nannette cared not for it.

We could not have done without you, said she,
letting go one hand, with self-taught politeness,
leading me up with the other.

A lame youth, whom Apollo had recompenced with
a pipe, and to which he had added a tabourin of his
own accord, ran sweetly over the prelude, as he sat
upon the bank — Tie me up this tress instantly, said
Nannette, putting a piece of string into my hand —
It taught me to forget I was a stranger — The whole
knot fell down — We had been seven years acquainted.

The youth struck the note upon the tabourin — his
pipe followed, and off we bounded — ' the deuce take
that slit ! '

The sister of the youth, who had stolen her voice
from heaven, sung alternately with her brother — 'twas
a Gascoigne roundelay.

VIVA LA JOIA !
FIDON LA TRISTESSA !

The nymphs joined in unison, and their swains an
octave below them —
426



LAURENCE STERNE



I would have given a crown to have it sewed up —
Nannette would not have given a sous — Vive la joia !
was in her lips — Vive la jota ! was in her eyes. A
transient spark of amity shot across the space betwixt
us — She looked amiable ! — Why could I not live, and
end my days thus ? Just disposer of our joys and
sorrows, cried I, why could not a man sit down in the
lap of content here — and dance, and sing, and say his
prayers, and go to heaven with this nut-brown maid ?

Tristram Shandy

273 The £Monk

THE monk, as I judged from the break in his
tonsure, a few scattered white hairs upon his
temples being all that remained of it, might be about
seventy — but from his eyes, and that sort of fire which
was in them, which seemed more tempered by courtesy
than years, could be no more than sixty — Truth might
lie between — He was certainly sixty-five ; and the
general air of his countenance, notwithstanding
something seemed to have been planting wrinkles
in it before their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads which Guido has often
painted — mild, pale — penetrating, free from all
common-place ideas of fat contented ignorance looking
downwards upon the earth — it looked forwards ; but
looked, as if it looked at something beyond this world.
How one of his order came by it, heaven above, who
let it fall upon a monk's shoulders, best knows ; but
it would have suited a Bramin, and had I met it upon
the plains of Indostan, I had reverenced it. . .

When he had entered the room three paces, he stood
still ; and laying his left hand upon his breast (a slender
white staff with which he journeyed being in his

427



LAURENCE STERNE



right) — when I had got close up to him, he introduced
himself with the little story of the wants of his convent,
and the poverty of his order — and did it with so
simple a grace — and such an air of deprecation was
there in the whole cast of his look and figure — I was
bewitched not to have been struck with it —

— A better reason was, I had predetermined not to
give him a single sous. . .

My heart smote me the moment he shut the door —
Psha ! said I, with an air of carelessness, three several
times — but it would not do : every ungracious syllable
I had uttered, crowded back into my imagination :
I reflected, I had no right over the poor Franciscan,
but to deny him ; and that the punishment of that
was enough to the disappointed, without the addition
of unkind language — I considered his grey hairs — his
courteous figure seemed to re-enter and gently ask
me what injury he had done me? — and why I could
use him thus ? — I would have given twenty livres for
an advocate — I have behaved very ill, said I within
myself ; but I have only just set out upon my travels ;
and shall learn better manners as I get along.

A Sentimental Journey

THOMAS GRAY

1716-1771

274 S^etley <t.ibbey

To the Rev. N. Ntcholls, Monday, ig November 1764.

QIR,

I received your letter at Southampton, and, as

1 would wish to treat everybody according to their
own rule and measure of good-breeding, have against
my inclination waited till now, before I answered it,

428



THOMAS GRAY



purely out of fear and respect, and an ingenuous
diffidence of my own abilities. If you will not take
this as an excuse, accept it at least as a well-turned
period, which is always my principal concern.

So I proceed to tell you, that my health is much
improved by the sea ; not that I drank it, or bathed
in it, as the common people do : no ! I only walked by
it, and looked upon it. The climate is remarkably
mild, even in October and November. No snow has
been seen to lie there for these thirty years past, the
myrtles grow in the ground against the houses, and
Guernsey-Lilhcs bloom in every window. The Town,
clean and well built, surrounded by its old stone-walls
with their towers and gateways, stands at the point of
a peninsula, and opens full south to an arm of the sea,
which, having formed two beautiful bays on each
hand of it stretches away in direct view till it joins
the British Channel. It is skirted on either side with
gently-rising grounds cloathed with thick wood, and
directly cross its mouth rise the high lands of the Isle
of Wight at distance, but distinctly seen. In the bosom
of the woods (concealed from profane eyes) lie hid
the ruins of Netteley-abbey. There may be richer
and greater houses of religion, but the Abbot is content
with his situation. See there, at the top of that
hanging meadow under the shade of those old trees,
that bend into a half-circle about it, he is walking
slowly (good Man !) and bidding his beads for the
souls of his Benefactors, interred in that venerable
pile, that lies beneath him. Beyond it (the meadow
still descending) nods a thicket of oaks, that mask the
building, and have excluded a view too garish, and too
luxuriant for a holy eye, only on either hand they
leave an opening to the blew glittering sea. Did not

429



THOMAS GRAY



you observe how, as that white sail shot by and was
lost, he turned and crossed himself, to drive the
Tempter from him, that had thrown that distraction
in his way. I should tell you, that the Ferryman, who
rowed me, a lusty young Fellow, told me that he would
not for all the world pass a night at the Abbey (there
were such things seen near it), though there was a power
of money hid there. From thence I went to Salisbury,
Wilton, and Stone-Henge, but of these things I say
no more : they will be published at the University-
Press.

Letters

275 To H. Walpole, with a Copy of
his Slegy

DEAR SIR,
As I live in a place, where even the ordinary
tattle of the town arrives not till it is stale, and which
produces no events of its own, you will not desire any
excuse from me for writing so seldom, especially as of
all people living I know you are the least a friend to
letters spun out of one's brains, with all the toil
and constraint that accompanies sentimental produc-
tions. I have been here at Stoke a few days (where
I shall continue good part of the summer) ; and having
put an end to a thing, whose beginning you have seen
long ago, I immediately send it you. You will, I hope,
look upon it in the light of a thing with an end, to it ;
a merit that most of my writings have wanted, and are
like to want, but which this epistle I am determined
shall not want, when it tells you that I am ever

Yours,

T. Gray.

Letters

43°



HORACE WALPOLE

1717-1797

276 Strawberry Hill

Twickenham, June 8, 1747.

YOU perceive by my date that I am got into a new
camp, and have left my tub at Windsor. It is
a little plaything-house that I got out of Mrs. Chene-
vix's shop, and is the prettiest bauble you ever saw.
It is set in enamelled meadows, with filigree hedges :

A small Euphrates through the piece is roU'd,
And little finches wave their wings in gold

Two delightful roads, that you would call dusty, supply
me continually with coaches and chaises : barges as
solemn as Barons of the Exchequer move under my
window ; Richmond Hill and Ham Walks bound my
prospect ; but, thank God ! the Thames is between
me and the Duchess of Queensberry. Dowagers as
plenty as flounders inhabit all around, and Pope's
ghost is just now skimming under my window by
a most poetical moonlight. I have about land enough
to keep such a farm as Noah's, when he set up in the
ark with a pair of each kind ; but my cottage is rather
cleaner than I believe his was after they had been
cooped up together forty days. The Chenevixes had
tricked it out for themselves : up two pair of stairs is
what they call Mr. Chenevix's library, furnished with
three maps, one shelf, a bust of Sir Isaac Newton, and
a lame telescope without any glasses. Lord John
Sackville predecessed me here, and instituted certain
games called cricketaha, which have been celebrated
this very evening in honour of him in a neighbouring
meadow.

Letter to H. S. Conway



43*



HORACE WALPOLE



277 Funeral of Qeorge II

Arlington Street, Nov. 13, 1760,

DO you know, I had the curiosity to go to the
burying t'other night ; I had never seen a royal
funeral ; nay, I walked as a rag of quality, which
I found would be, and so it was, the easiest way of
seeing it. It is absolutely a noble sight. The Prince's
Chamber, hung with purple, and a quantity of silver
lamps, the coffin under a canopy of purple velvet,
and six vast chandeliers of silver on high stands, had
a very good effect. The Ambassador from Tripoli and
his son were carried to see that chamber. The pro-
cession through a line of foot-guards, every seventh
man bearing a torch, the horse-guards lining the
outside, their officers with drawn sabres and crape
sashes on horseback, the drums muffled, the fifes,
bells tolling, and minute guns, all this was very solemn.
But the charm was the entrance of the Abbey, where
we were received by the Dean and Chapter in rich
robes, the choir and almsmen all bearing torches ; the
whole Abbey so illuminated, that one saw it to greater
advantage than by day ; the tombs, long aisles, and
fretted roof, all appearing distinctly, and with the
happiest chiaroscuro. There wanted nothing but
incense, and little chapels here and there, with priests
saying mass for the repose of the defunct — yet one
could not complain of its not being catholic enough.
I had been in dread of being coupled with some boy
of ten years old — but the heralds were not very accu-
rate, and I walked with George Grenville, taller and
older enough to keep me in countenance. When we
came to the chapel of Henry the Seventh, all solemnity
and decorum ceased — no order was observed, people set
or stood where they could or would, the yeomen of
432



HORACE WALPOLE

the guard were crying out for help, oppressed by the
immense weight of the coffin, the Bishop read sadly,
and blundered in the prayers, the fine chapter, Man
that is born of a woman, was chanted, not read, and
the anthem, besides being unmeasurably tedious,
would have served as well for a nuptial. The real
serious part was the figure of the Duke of Cumberland,
heightened by a thousand melancholy circumstances.
He had a dark brown adonis, and a cloak of black
cloth, with a train of five yards. Attending the funeral
of a father, however little reason he had so to
love him, could not be pleasant. His leg extremely
bad, yet forced to stand upon it near two hours, his
face bloated and distorted with his late paralytic
stroke, which has affected, too, one of his eyes, and
placed over the mouth of the vault, into which, in
all probability, he must himself so soon descend —
think how unpleasant a situation ! He bore it all
with a firm and unaffected countenance. This grave
scene was fully contrasted by the burlesque Duke of
Newcastle. He fell into a fit of crying the moment he
came into the chapel, and flung himself back in a stall,
the Archbishop hovering over him with a smelling-
bottle — but in two minutes his curiosity got the better
of his hypocrisy, and he ran about the chapel with his
glass to spy who was or was not there, spying with one
hand, and mopping his eyes with t'other. Then re-
turned the fear of catching cold, and the Duke of Cum-
berland, who was sinking with heat, felt himself weighed
down, and turning round, found it was the Duke of New-
castle standing upon his train to avoid the chill of the
marble. It was very theatric to look down into the vault,
where the coffin lay, attended by mourners with lights.
Clavering, the Groom of the Bedchamber, refused to sit
up with the body, and was dismissed by the King's order.

Letter to George Montagu
433



GILBERT WHITE

1720-1793

278 The ^ed Deer of Wolmer Forest

i

NOR does the loss of our black game prove the
only gap in the Fauna Selborniensis ; for another
beautiful link in the chain of beings is wanting, — I
mean the red deer, which, toward the beginning of this
century, amounted to about five hundred head, and
made a stately appearance. There is an old keeper,
now alive, named Adams, whose great grandfather
(mentioned in a perambulation taken in 1635), grand-
father, father, and self, enjoyed the head keepership
of Wolmer-forest in succession for more than a hundred
years. This person assures me that his father has often
told him that Queen Anne, as she was journeying on the
Portsmouth road, did not think the forest of Wolmer
beneath her royal regard. For she came out of the
great road at Lippock, which is just by, and reposing
herself on a bank, smoothed for that purpose, lying
about half a mile to the east of Wolmer-pond, and still
called Queen's-bank, saw with great complacency and
satisfaction the whole herd of red deer brought by
the keepers along the vale before her, consisting then
of about five hundred head. A sight this, worthy the
attention of the greatest sovereign ! But he farther
adds, that, by means of the W altham blacks, or, to use
his own expression, as soon as they began blacking,
they were reduced to about fifty head, and so con-
tinued decreasing till the time of the late Duke of
Cumberland. It is now more than thirty years ago
434



GILBERT WHITE



that his highness sent down an huntsman, and six
yeoman-prickers, in scarlet jackets laced with gold,
attended by the stag-hounds, ordering them to take
every deer in this forest alive, and to convey them in
carts to W indsor. In the course of the summer they
caught every stag, some of which showed extraordinary
diversion ; but, in the following winter, when the
hinds were also carried off, such fine chases were
exhibited as served the country people for matter of
talk and wonder for years afterwards. I saw myself
one of the yeoman-prickers single out a stag from the
herd, and must confess that it was the most curious
feat of activity I ever beheld, — superior to anything
in Mr. Jstley's riding-school. The exertions made by
the horse and deer much exceeded all my expectations,
though the former greatly excelled the iatter in speed.
When the devoted deer was separated from his com-
panions, they gave him, by their watches, law, as they
called it, for twenty minutes ; when, sounding their
horns, the stop-dogs were permitted to pursue, and
a most gallant scene ensued.

it

Though large herds of deer do much harm to the
neighbourhood, yet the injury to the morals of the
people is of more moment than the loss of their crops.
The temptation is irresistible ; for most men are
sportsmen by constitution : and there is such an
inherent spirit for hunting in human nature, as scarce
any inhibitions can restrain. Hence, towards the
beginning of this century, all this country was wild
about deer-stealing. Unless he was a hunter, as they
affected to call themselves, no young person was
allowed to be possessed of manhood or gallantry. The

435



GILBERT WHITE



Waltham blacks at length committed such enormities,
that government was forced to interfere with that
severe and sanguinary act called the black act, which
now comprehends more felonies than any law that ever
was framed before ; and, therefore, a late bishop of
Winchester, when urged to re-stock W altham-chase,
refused, from a motive worthy of a prelate, replying,
that ' it had done mischief enough already.'

Our old race of deer-stealers are hardly extinct yet.
It was but a little while ago that, over their ale, they
used to recount the exploits of their youth ; such as
watching the pregnant hind to her lair, and when the
calf was dropped, paring its feet with a penknife to the
quick, to prevent its escape, till it was large and fat
enough to be killed ; the shooting at one of their
neighbours with a bullet, in a turnip-field, by moon-
shine, mistaking him for a deer ; and the losing a dog
in the following extraordinary manner : — Some fellows,
suspecting that a calf new-fallen was deposited in
a certain spot of thick fern, went with a lurcher to
surprise it ; when the parent hind rushed out of the
brake, and taking a vast spring, with all her feet close
together, pitched upon the neck of the dog, and
broke it short in two.

Natural History of Sclbome

2jg The Bat

I WAS much entertained last summer with a tame
bat, which would take flies out of a person's hand.
If you gave it anything to eat, it brought its wings
round before the mouth, hovering and hiding its head
in the manner of birds of prey when they feed. The
adroitness it showed in shearing off the wings of the
436



GILBERT WHITE



flies, which were always rejected, was worthy of
observation and pleased me much. Insects seemed to
be most acceptable, though it did not refuse raw flesh
when offered ; so that the notion that bats go down
chimneys and gnaw men's bacon seems no improbable
story. While I amused myself with this wonderful
quadruped, I saw it several times confute the vulgar
opinion, that bats, when down on a flat surface, cannot
get on the wing again, by rising with great ease from
the floor. It ran, I observed, with more despatch than
I was aware of ; but in a most ridiculous and grotesque
manner.

Bats drink on the wing, like swallows, by sipping
the surface, as they play over pools and streams. They
love to frequent waters, not only for the sake of
drinking, but on account of insects, which are found
over them in the greatest plenty. As I was going
some years ago, pretty late, in a boat from Richmond
to Sunbury, on a warm summer's evening, I think I
saw myriads of bats between the two places ; the air
swarmed with them all along the Thames, so that
hundreds were in sight at a time.

Natural History of Selbome

280 'The Sussex Downs

THOUGH I have now travelled the Sussex-downs
upwards of thirty years, yet I still investigate that
chain of majestic mountains with fresh admiration year
by year ; and I think I see new beauties every time I
traverse it. The range, which runs from Chichester
eastward as far as East-Bourn, is about sixty miles in
length, and is called The South Downs, properly speak-
ing, only round Lewes. As you pass along, you com-

437



GILBERT WHITE



mand a noble view of the wild, or weald, on one hand,
and the broad downs and sea on the other. Mr. Ray
used to visit a family just at the foot of these hills,
and was so ravished with the prospect from Plumpton-
flavn, near Lewes, that he mentions those scapes in
his ' Wisdom of God in the Works of the Creation,'
with the utmost satisfaction, and thinks them equal
to any thing he had seen in the finest parts of Europe.

For my own part, I think there is somewhat peculiarly
sweet and amusing in the shapely figured aspect of
chalk-hills, in preference to those of stone, which are
rugged, broken, abrupt, and shapeless.

Perhaps I may be singular in my opinion, and not
so happy as to convey to you the same idea, but I
never contemplate these mountains without thinking I
perceive somewhat analogous to growth in their gentle
swellings and smooth fungus-like protuberances, their
fluted sides, and regular hollows and slopes, that carry
at once the air of vegetative dilatation and expan-
sion. . ?■ Or was there ever a time when these immense
masses of calcareous matter were thrown into fermenta-
tion by some adventitious moisture, — were raised and
leavened into such shapes by some plastic power, and
so made to swell and heave their broad backs into the
sky, so much above the less animated clay of the wild

below ? Natural History of Selborne

281 ^oks

THE evening proceedings and manoeuvres of the
rooks are curious and amusing in the autumn.
Just before dusk they return in long strings from the
foraging of the day, and rendezvous by thousands over
Selborne-down, where they wheel round in the air,
1 So in original : no omission

438



GILBERT WHITE

and sport and dive in a playful manner, all the while
exerting their voices, and making a loud cawing, which,
being blended and softened by the distance that we at
the village are below them, becomes a confused noise or
chiding ; or rather a pleasing murmur, very engaging
to the imagination, and not unlike the cry of a pack of
hounds in hollow echoing woods, or the rushing of the
wind in tall trees, or the tumbling of the tide upon a
pebbly shore. When this ceremony is over, with the
last gleam of day, they retire for the night to the deep
beechen woods of listed and Ropley. We remember
a little girl who, as she was going to bed, used to
remark on such an occurrence, in the true spirit of
physico-theology, that the rooks were saying their
prayers ; and yet this child was much too young to be
aware that the scriptures have said of the Deity, that
' he feedeth the ravens who call upon Him '.

Natural History of Selborne



WILLIAM ROBERTSON

1721-1793

282 The ^Murder of T(izio

NOTHING now remained but to concert the plan
of operation, to chuse the actors, and to assign
them their parts in perpetrating this detestable crime.
Every circumstance here paints and characterises the
manners and men of that age, and fills us with horror
at both. The place chosen for committing such a deed
was the Queen's bedchamber. Though Mary was now
in the sixth month of her pregnancy, and though
Rizio might have been seized elsewhere without any
difficulty, the King pitched upon this place, that he

439



WILLIAM ROBERTSON

might enjoy the malicious pleasure of reproaching
Rizio with his crimes before the Queen's face. The
Earl of Morton, the Lord High Chancellor of the
kingdom, undertook to direct an enterprize, carried on
in defiance of all the laws of which he was bound to
be guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who had been con-
fined to his bed for three months by a very dangerous
distemper, and who was still so feeble that he could
scarce walk, or bear the weight of his own armour,
was entrusted with the executive part ; and while
he himself needed to be supported by two men, he
came abroad to commit a murder in the presence of
his sovereign.

On the 9th of March, Morton entered the court
of the palace with an hundred and sixty men ; and
without noise, or meeting with any resistance, seized
all the gates. While the Queen was at supper with
the Countess of Argyll, Rizio, and a few domestics,
the King suddenly entered the apartment by a private
passage. At his back was Ruthven, clad in complete
armour, and with that ghastly and horrid look which
long sickness had given him. Three or four of his most
trusty accomplices followed him. Such an unusual
appearance alarmed those who were present. Rizio
instantly apprehended that he was the victim at whom
the blow was aimed ; and in the utmost consternation
retired behind the Queen, of whom he laid hold, hoping
that the reverence due to her person might prove
some protection to him. The conspirators had pro-
ceeded too far to be restrained by any considerations
of that kind. Numbers of armed men rushed into
the chamber. Ruthven drew his dagger, and with a
furious mien and voice commanded Rizio to leave a
place of which he was unworthy, and which he had
440



WILLIAM ROBERTSON



occupied too long. Mary employed tears, and en-
treaties, and threatenings, to save her favourite. But,
notwithstanding all these, he was torn from her by
violence, and before he could be dragged through the
next apartment, the rage of his enemies put an end to
his life, piercing his body with fifty-six wounds.

History of Scotland



TOBIAS SMOLLETT

1721-1771

283 'Trunnioi? s Wedding

THE fame of this extraordinary conjunction spread
all over the county ; and on the day appointed
for their spousals, the church was surrounded by an
inconceivable multitude. The commodore, to give
a specimen of his gallantry, by the advice of his friend
Hatchway, resolved to appear on horseback on the
grand occasion, at the head of all his male attendants,
whom he had rigged with the white shirts and black
caps formerly belonging to his barge's crew ; and he
bought a couple of hunters for the accommodation of
himself and his lieutenant. With this equipage then
he set out from the garrison for the church, after having
dispatched a messenger to apprize the bride that he
and his company were mounted ; whereupon she got
immediately into the coach, accompanied by her
brother and his wife, and drove directly to the place
of assignation, where several pews were demolished,
and divers persons almost pressed to death, by the
eagerness of the crowd that broke in to see the cere-
mony performed. Thus arrived at the altar, and the
priest in attendance, they waited a whole half hour

441



TOBIAS SMOLLETT



for the commodore, at whose slowness they began to
be under some apprehension, and accordingly dismissed
a servant to quicken his pace. The valet having
rode something more than a mile, espied the whole
troop disposed in a long field, crossing the road
obliquely, and headed by the bridegroom and his
friend Hatchway, who, finding himself hindered by
a hedge from proceeding farther in the same direction,
fired a pistol, and stood over to the other side, making
an obtuse angle with the line of his former course ;
and the rest of the squadron followed his example,
keeping always in the rear of each other, like a flight
of wild geese.

Surprized at this strange method of journeying, the
messenger came up, and told the commodore that his
lady and her company expected him in the church,
where they had tarried a considerable time, and were
beginning to be very uneasy at his delay ; and there-
fore desired he would proceed with more expedition.
To this message Mr. Trunnion replied, ' Hark ye,
brother, don't you see we make all possible speed?
go back, and tell those who sent you, that the wind
has shifted since we weighed anchor, and that we are
obliged to make very short trips in tacking, by reason
of the narrowness of the channel ; and that, as we
lie within six points of the wind, they must make some
allowance for variation and leeway.' ' Lord, sir ! '
said the valet, 4 what occasion have you to go zigzag
in that manner? Do but clap spurs to your horses,
and ride straight forward, and I'll engage you shall be
at the church porch in less than a quarter of an hour.'
' What ! right in the wind's eye ? ' answered the
commander, ' ahey ! brother, where did you learn
your navigation ? Hawser Trunnion is not to be taught
442



TOBIAS SMOLLETT



at this time of day how to lie his course, or keep his
own reckoning. And as for you, brother, you know
best the trim of your own frigate.' The courier
finding he had to do with people who would not be
easily persuaded out of their own opinions, returned
to the temple, and made a report of what he had seen
and heard, to the no small consolation of the bride,
who had begun to discover some signs of disquiet.
Composed, however, by this piece of intelligence, she
exerted her patience for the space of another half hour,
during which period, seeing no bridegroom arrive, she
was exceedingly alarmed ; so that all the spectators
could easily perceive her perturbation, which mani-
fested itself in frequent palpitations, heart-heavings,
and alterations of countenance, in spite of the assistance
of a smelling-bottle, which she incessantly applied
to her nostrils.

Various were the conjectures of the company on
this occasion. Some imagined he had mistaken the
place of rendezvous, as he had never been at church
since he first settled in that parish ; others believed
he had met with some accident, in consequence of
which his attendants had carried him back to his own
house ; and a third set, in which the bride herself was
thought to be comprehended, could not help suspecting
that the commodore had changed his mind. But all
these suppositions, ingenious as they were, happened
to be wide of the true cause that detained him, which
was no other than this : the commodore and his
crew had, by dint of turning, almost weathered the
parson's house that stood to windward of the church,
when the notes of a pack of hounds unluckily reached
the ears of the two hunters which Trunnion and the
lieutenant bestrode. These fleet animals no sooner



443



TOBIAS SMOLLETT



heard the enlivening sound, than, eager for the chace,
they sprung away all of a sudden, and straining every
nerve to partake of the sport, flew across the fields with
incredible speed, overleaped hedges and ditches, and
everything in their way, without the least regard to
their unfortunate riders. The lieutenant, whose steed
had got the heels of the other, finding it would be
great folly and presumption in him to pretend to keep
the saddle with his wooden leg, very wisely took the
opportunity of throwing himself off in his passage
through a field of rich clover, among which he lay at
his ease ; and seeing his captain advancing at full
gallop, hailed him with the salutation of ' What chear ?
ho ! ' The commodore, who was in infinite distress,
eyeing him askance, as he passed, replied with a faulter-
ing voice, ' O damn ye ! you are safe at an anchor ;
I wish to God I were as fast moored.' Nevertheless,
conscious of his disabled heel, he would not venture to
try the same experiment which had succeeded so well
with Hatchway, but resolved to stick as close as possible
to his horse's back, until providence should interpose
in his behalf. With this view he dropped his whip,
and with his right hand laid fast hold on the pummel,
contracting every muscle in his body to secure himself
in the seat, and grinning most formidably, in conse-
quence of this exertion. In this attitude he was
hurried on a considerable way, when all of a sudden
his view was comforted by a five bar gate that appeared
before him, as he never doubted that there the career
of his hunter must necessarily end. But, alas ! he
reckoned without his host ; far from halting at this
obstruction, the horse sprung over it with amazing
agility, to the utter confusion and disorder of his owner,
who lost his hat and periwig in the leap, and now

444



TOBIAS SMOLLETT



began to think in good earnest that he was actually
mounted on the back of the devil. He recommended
himself to God, his reflection forsook him, his eye-sight
and all his other senses failed, he quitted the reins,
and, fastening by instinct on the mane, was in this
condition conveyed into the midst of the sportsmen,
who were astonished at the sight of such an apparition.
Neither was their surprize to be wondered at, if we
reflect on the figure that presented itself to their
view. The commodore's person was at all times an
object of admiration ; much more so on this occasion,
when every singularity was aggravated by the circum-
stances of his dress and disaster.

He had put on, in honour of his nuptials, his best
coat of blue broad cloth, cut by a taylor of Ramsgate,
and trimmed with five dozen of brass buttons, large
and small ; his breeches were of the same piece,
fastened at the knees with large bunches of tape ;
his waistcoat was of red plush, lapelled with green
velvet, and garnished with vellum holes ; his boots
bore an intimate resemblance, both in colour and shape,
to a pair of leather buckets ; his shoulder was graced
with a broad buff belt, from whence depended a huge
hanger with a hilt like that of a backsword ; and on
each side of his pummel appeared a rusty pistol,
rammed in a case covered with a bear-skin. The loss
of his tye-periwig and laced hat, which were curiosities
of the kind, did not at all contribute to the improve-
ment of the picture, but, on the contrary, by exhibiting
his bald pate, and the natural extension of his lanthorn
jaws, added to the peculiarity and extravagance of the
whole. Such a spectacle could not have failed of
diverting the whole company from the chace, had his
horse thought proper to pursue a different route,

445



TOBIAS SMOLLETT

but the beast was too keen a sporter to choose any other
way than that which the stag followed ; and, therefore,
without stopping to gratify the curiosity of the
spectators, he, in a few minutes, outstripped every
hunter in the field ; and there being a deep hollow way
betwixt him and the hounds, rather than ride round
about the length of a furlong to a path that crossed
the lane, he transported himself, at one jump, to the
unspeakable astonishment and terror of a waggoner
who chanced to be underneath, and saw this pheno-
menon fly over his carriage. This was not the only
adventure he achieved. The stag having taken a deep
river that lay in his way, every man directed his course
to a bridge in the neighbourhood ; but our bride-
groom's courser, despising all such conveniences,
plunged into the stream without hesitation, and swam
in a twinkling to the opposite shore. This sudden
immersion into an element, of which Trunnion was
properly a native, in all probability helped to recruit
the exhausted spirits of his rider, who, at his landing
on the other side, gave some tokens of sensation, by
hollowing aloud for assistance, which he could not
possibly receive, because his horse still maintained the
advantage he had gained, and would not allow himself
to be overtaken.

In short, after a long chace that lasted several hours,
and extended to a dozen miles at least, he was the
first in at the death of the deer, being seconded by
the lieutenant's gelding, which, actuated by the same
spirit, had, without a rider, followed his companion's
example.

Peregrine Pukle



446



SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS

' 1723-1792

284 The Contemplation of Excellence

WHOEVER has so far formed his taste, as to be
able to relish and feel the beauties of the great
masters, has gone a great way in his study ; for, merely
from a consciousness of this relish of the right, the
mind swells with an inward pride, and is almost as
powerfully affected, as if it had itself produced what
it admires. Our hearts, frequently warmed in this
manner by the contact of those whom we wish to
resemble, will undoubtedly catch something of their
way of thinking ; and we shall receive in our own
bosoms some radiation at least of their fire and splen-
dour. That disposition, which is so strong in children,
still continues with us, of catching involuntarily the
general air and manner of those with whom we are
most conversant ; with this difference only, that
a young mind is naturally pliable and imitative ; but
in a more advanced state it grows rigid, and must be
warmed and softened before it will receive a deep
impression.

From these considerations, which a little of your
own reflection will carry a great way further, it appears,
of what great consequence it is, that our minds should
be habituated to the contemplation of excellence ; and
that, far from being contented to make such habits the
discipline of our youth only, we should, to the last
moment of our lives, continue a settled intercourse
with all the true examples of grandeur. Their inven-
tions are not only the food of our infancy, but the
substance which supplies the fullest maturity of our
vigour. . .

447



SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS

Nor, whilst I recommend studying the Art from
Artists, can I be supposed to mean that Nature is to
be neglected ; I take this study in aid, and not in
exclusion of the other. Nature is and must be the
fountain which alone is inexhaustible, and from which
all excellencies must originally flow.

The great use of studying our predecessors is, to
open the mind, to shorten our labour, and to give
us the result of the selection made by those great
minds of what is grand or beautiful in Nature ; her
rich stores are all spread out before us ; but it is
an art, and no easy art, to know how or what to
choose, and how to attain and secure the object of
our choice.

Thus the highest beauty of form must be taken from
nature ; but it is an art of long deduction and great
experience to know how to find it.

We must not content ourselves with merely admiring
and relishing ; we must enter into the principles on
which the work is wrought : these do not swim on the
superficies, and consequently are not open to superficial
observers.

Art in its perfection is not ostentatious ; it lies hid
and works its effect, itself unseen. It is the proper
study and labour of an artist to uncover and find out
the latent cause of conspicuous beauties, and from
thence form principles for his own conduct ; such an
examination is a continual exertion of the mind ; as
great, perhaps, as that of the Artist whose works he
is thus studying.

Sixth Discourse



448



ADAM SMITH



1723-1790

285 The leewards of the ^Professions

FIFTHLY, The wages of labour in different employ-
ments vary according to the probability or im-
probability of success in them.

The probability that any particular person should
ever be qualified for the employment to which he is
educated, is very different in different occupations.
In the greater part of mechanick trades, success is
almost certain ; but very uncertain in the liberal
professions. Put your son apprentice to a shoemaker,
there is little doubt of his learning to make a pair of
shoes : But send him to study the law, it is at least
twenty to one if ever he makes such a proficiency as
will enable him to live by the business. In a perfectly
fair lottery, those who draw the prizes ought to gain
all that is lost by those who draw the blanks. In
a profession where twenty fail for one that succeeds,
that one ought to gain all that should have been gained
by the unsuccessful twenty. The counsellor at law,
who, perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to
make something by his profession, ought to receive
the retribution, not only of his own so tedious and
expensive education, but of that of more than twenty
others who are never likely to make anything by it.
How extravagant soever the fees of counsellors at
law may sometimes appear, their real retribution is
never equal to this. Compute in any particular place,
what is likely to be annually gained, and what is likely
to be annually spent, by all the different workmen in
any common trade, such as that of shoemakers or
weavers, and you will find that the former sum will

2830 Q 449



ADAM SMITH

generally exceed the latter. But make the same
computation with regard to all the counsellors and
students of law, in all the different inns of court,
and you will find that their annual gains bear but
a very small proportion to their annual expence, even
though you rate the former as high, and the latter as
low, as can well be done. The lottery of the law,
therefore, is very far from being a perfectly fair
lottery ; and that, as well as many other liberal and
honourable professions, are, in point of pecuniary gain,
evidently under-recompenced.

Those professions keep their level, however, with
other occupations, and, notwithstanding these dis-
couragements, all the most generous and liberal spirits
are eager to crowd into them. Two different causes
contribute to recommend them. First, the desire
of the reputation which attends upon superior excel-
lence in any of them ; and, secondly, the natural
confidence which every man has, more or less, not only
in his own abilities, but in his own good fortune.

To excel in any profession, in which but few arrive
at mediocrity, is the most decisive mark of what is
called genius or superior talents. The publick admira-
tion which attends upon such distinguished abilities,
makes always a part of their reward ; a greater or
smaller in proportion as it is higher or lower in degree.
It makes a considerable part of it in the profession
of physick ; a still greater perhaps in that of law ; in
poetry and philosophy it makes almost the whole.

Wealth of Nations



45°



OLIVER GOLDSMITH

i 728-1 7 74

286 <sA <Party at Vauxhall

THE People of London are as fond of walking, as
our friends at Pektn of riding ; one of the principal
entertainments of the citizens here in summer, is to
repair about nightfall to a garden not far from town,
where they walk about, shew their best cloaths and
best faces, and listen to a concert provided for the
occasion.

I accepted an invitation a few evenings ago from
my old friend, the man in black, to be one of a party
that was to sup there, and at the appointed hour
waited upon him at his lodgings. There I found the
company assembled and expecting my arrival. Our
party consisted of my friend in superlative finery, his
stockings rolled, a black velvet waistcoat, which was
formerly new, and his grey wig combed down in
imitation of hair. A pawn-broker's widow, of whom,
by the bye, my friend was a professed admirer, dressed
out in green damask, with three gold rings on every
finger. Mr. Tibbs, the second-rate beau, I have
formerly described, together with his lady, in flimsy
silk, dirty gauze instead of hnnen, and an hat as big
as an umbrello. . .

The illuminations began before we arrived, and I
must confess, that upon entnng the gardens, I found
every sense overpaid with more than expected pleasure ;
the lights every where glimmering through the
scarcely moving trees ; the full-bodied concert bursting
on the stillness of the night, the natural concert of
the birds in the more retired part of the grove, vying
with that which was formed by art; the company
gayly dressed, loobng satisfaction, and the tables

451



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



spread with various delicacies, all conspired to fill my
imagination with the visionary happiness of the
Arabian lawgiver, and lifted me into an extasy of
admiration. Head of Confucius, cried I to my friend,
this is fine ! this unites rural beauty with courtly
magnificence ; if we except the virgins of immortality
that hang on every tree, and may be plucked at every
desire, I don't see how this falls short of Mahomet's
Paradise ! As for virgins, cries my friend, it is true
they are a fruit that don't much abound in our
gardens here ; but if ladies as plenty as apples in
autumn, and as complying as any houry of them all,
can content you, I fancy we have no need to go to
heaven for Paradise.

I was going to second his remarks, when we were
called to a consultation by Mr. Tibbs and the rest of
the company, to know in what manner we were to
lay out the evening to the greatest advantage. Mrs.
Tibbs was for keeping the genteel walk of the garden,
where she observed there was always the very best
company ; the widow, on the contrary, who came but
once a season, was for securing a good standing-place
to see the water-works, which she assured us would
begin in less than an hour at farthest ; a dispute
therefore began, and as it was managed between two
of very opposite characters, it threatened to grow
more bitter at every reply. Mrs. Tibbs wondered how
people could pretend to know the polite world, who
had received all their rudiments of breeding behind
a compter ; to which the other replied, that tho' some
people sat behind compters, yet they could sit at the
head of their own tables too, and carve three good
dishes of hot meat whenever they thought proper,
which was more than some people could say for them-
45*



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



selves, that hardly knew a rabbet and onions from
a green goose and gooseberries.

It is hard to say where this might have ended, had
not the husband, who probably knew the impetuosity
of his wife's disposition, proposed to end the dispute
by adjourning to a box, and try if there was any thing
to be had for supper that was supportable. . .

Mr. Tibbs now willing to prove that his wife's
pretensions to music were just, entreated her to favour
the company with a song ; but to this she gave a
positive denial, for you know very well, my dear, says
she, that I am not in voice to day, and when one's
voice is not equal to one's judgment, what signifies
singing ; besides, as there is no accompanyment, it
would be but spoiling music. All these excuses
however were overruled by the rest of the company,
who though one would think they already had music
enough, joined in the intreaty. But particularly the
widow, now willing to convince the company of her
breeding, pressed so warmly, that she seemed deter-
mined to take no refusal. At last, then, the lady
complied, and after humming for some minutes, began
with such a voice and such affectation, as, I could
perceive, gave but little satisfaction to any except
her husband. He sat with rapture in his eye, and beat
time with his hand on the table.

You must observe, my friend, that it is the custom
of this country, when a lady or gentleman happens to
sing, for the company to sit as mute and as motionless
as statues. Every feature, every limb must seem to
correspond in fixed attention, and while the song
continues, they are to remain in a state of universal
petrefaction. In this mortifying situation we had
continued for some time, listening to the song, and

453



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



looking with tranquillity, when the master of the box
came to inform us that the water-works were going
to begin. At this information, I could instantly per-
ceive the widow bounce from her seat ; but correcting
herself, she sat down again, repressed by motives of
good breeding. Mrs. Tibbs, who had seen the water-
works an hundred times, resolved not to be inter-
rupted, continued her song without any share of
mercy, nor had the smallest pity on our impatience.
The widow's face, I own, gave me high entertainment ;
in it I could plainly read the struggle she felt between
good breeding and curiosity ; she talked of the water-
works the whole evening before, and seemed to have
come merely in order to see them ; but then she
could not bounce out in the very middle of a song,
for that would be forfeiting all pretensions to high-
life, or high-lived company ever after : Mrs. Tibbs,
therefore, kept on singing, and we continued to listen,
till at last, when the song was just concluded, the waiter
came to inform us that the water-works were over !

The water-works over, cried the widow ! the water-
works over already, that 's impossible, they can't be
over so soon ! It is not my business, replied the fellow,
to contradict your ladyship, I'll run again and see ;
he went, and soon returned with a confirmation of the
dismal tidings. No ceremony could now bind my
friend's disappointed mistress, she testified her dis-
pleasure in the openest manner ; in short, she now
began to find fault in turn, and at last, insisted upon
going home, just at the time that Mr. and Mrs. Tibbs
assured the company, that the polite hours were going
to begin, and that the ladies would instantaneously
be entertained with the horns.

Citizen of the World



4S4



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



287 The Decoys

MR. BURCHELL had scarce taken leave, and
Sophia consented to dance with the chaplain,
when my little ones came running out to tell us that
the 'Squire was come with a crowd of company. Upon
our return, we found our landlord, with a couple of
under gentlemen and two young ladies richly drest,
whom he introduced as women of very great distinc-
tion and fashion from town. We happened not to
have chairs enough for the whole company : but
Mr. Thornhill immediately proposed that every
gentleman should sit in a lady's lap. This I positively
objected to, notwithstanding a look of disapprobation
from my wife. Moses was therefore dispatched to
borrow a couple of chairs ; and as we were in want of
ladies also to make up a set at country dances, the two
gentlemen went with him in quest of a couple of
partners. Chairs and partners were soon provided. The
gentlemen returned with my neighbour Flamborough's
rosy daughters, flaunting with red top-knots. But
there was an unlucky circumstance which was not ad-
verted to ; though the Miss Flamborough's were
reckoned the very best dancers in the parish, and under-
stood the jig and the round-about to perfection, yet
they were totally unacquainted with country dances.
This at first discomposed us : however, after a little
shoving and dragging, they at last went merrily on. Our
music consisted of two fiddles, with a pipe and tabor.
The moon shone bright, Mr. Thornhill and my eldest
daughter led up the ball, to the great delight of the
spectators ; for the neighbours, hearing what was
going forward, came flocking about us. My girl moved
with so much grace and vivacity, that my wife could

455



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



not avoid discovering the pride of her heart, by
assuring me, that though the little chit did it so
cleverly, all the steps were stolen from herself. The
ladies of the town strove hard to be equally easy, but
without success* They swam, sprawled, languished,
and frisked ; but all would not do : the gazers indeed
owned that it was fine ; but neighbour Flamborough
observed, that Miss Livy's feet seemed as pat to the
music as its echo. After the dance had continued
about an hour, the two ladies, who were apprehensive
of catching cold, moved to break up the ball. One of
them, I thought, expressed her sentiments upon this
occasion in a very coarse manner, when she observed,
that by the living jingo, she was all of a muck of sweat.
Upon our return to the house, we found a very
elegant cold supper, which Mr. Thornhill had ordered
to be brought with him. The conversation at this time
was more reserved than before. The two ladies threw
my girls quite into the shade ; for they would talk
of nothing but high life, and high-lived company ;
with other fashionable topics, such as pictures, taste,
Shakespear, and the musical glasses. 'Tis true they
once or twice mortified us sensibly by slipping out an
oath ; but that appeared to me as the surest symptom
of their distinction, (tho' I am since informed that
swearing is perfectly unfashionable). Their finery,
however, threw a veil over any grossness in their
conversation. My daughters seemed to regard their
superior accomplishments with envy ; and what ap-
peared amiss was ascribed to tip- top quality breeding. . .

Michaelmas eve happening on the next day, we
were invited to burn nuts and play tricks at neighbour
Flamborough's. Our late mortifications had humbled
us a little, or it is probable we might have rejected
456



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



such an invitation with contempt : however, we suffered
ourselves to be happy. Our honest neighbour's goose
and dumplings were fine, and the lamb's-wool, even
in the opinion of my wife, who was a connoisseur, was
excellent. It is true, his manner of telling stories was
not quite so well. They were very long, and very dull,
and all about himself, and we had laughed at them ten
times before : however, we were kind enough to laugh
at them once more.

Mr. Burchell, who was of the party, was always
fond of seeing some innocent amusement going forward,
and set the boys and girls to blind man's buff. My
wife too was perswaded to join in the diversion, and
it gave me pleasure to think she was not yet too old.
In the mean time, my neighbour and I looked on,
laughed at every feat, and praised our own dexterity
when we were young. Hot cockles succeeded next,
questions and commands followed that, and last of
all, they sat down to hunt the slipper. As every person
may not be acquainted with this primaeval pastime,
it may be necessary to observe, that the company at
this play plant themselves in a ring upon the ground
all except one who stands in the middle, whose business
it is to catch a shoe, which the company shove about
their hams from one to another, something like a
weaver's shuttle. As it is impossible, in this case, for
the lady who is up to face all the company at once, the
great beauty of the play lies in hitting her a thump with
the heel of the shoe on that side least capable of making
a defence. It was in this manner that my eldest
daughter was hemmed in, and thumped about, all
blowzed, in spirits, and bawling for fair play, fair play,
with a voice that might deafen a ballad singer, when,
confusion on confusion, who should enter the room

457



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



but our two great acquaintances from town, Lady
Blarney and Miss Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs !
Description would but beggar, therefore it is unneces-
sary to describe this new mortification. Death !
To be seen by ladies of such high breeding in such
vulgar attitudes ! Nothing better could ensue from
such a vulgar play of Mr. Flamborough's proposing.
We seemed stuck to the ground for some time, as if
actually petrified with amazement.

The two ladies had been at our house to see us, and
finding us from home, came after us hither, as they
were uneasy to know what accident could have kept
us from church the day before. Olivia undertook to
be our prolocutor, and delivered the whole in a sum-
mary way, only saying, ' We were thrown from our
horses.' At which account the ladies were greatly
concerned ; but being told the family received no
hurt, they were extremely glad ; but being informed
that we were almost killed by the fright, they were
vastly sorry ; but hearing that we had a very good
night, they were extremely glad again. Nothing could
exceed their complaisance to my daughters ; their
professions the last evening were warm, but now they
were ardent. They protested a desire of having a more
lasting acquaintance. Lady Blarney was particularly
attached to Olivia ; Miss Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia
Skeggs (I love to give the whole name) took a greater
fancy to her sister. They supported the conversation
between themselves, while my daughters sate silent,
admiring their exalted breeding. But as every reader,
however beggarly himself, is fond of high-lived
dialogues, with anecdotes of Lords, Ladies, and Knights
of the Garter, I must beg leave to give him the con-
cluding part of the present conversation.
458



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



' All that I know of the matter,' cried Miss Skeggs,
' is this, that it may be true, or it may not be true : but
this I can assure your Ladyship, that the whole rout
was in amaze ; his Lordship turned all manner of
colours, my Lady fell into a sound, but Sir Tomkyn,
drawing his sword, swore he was her's to the last drop
of his blood.'

' Well,' replied our Peeress, ' this I can say, that the
Duchess never told me a syllable of the matter, and
I believe her Grace would keep nothing a secret from
me. This you may depend on as fact, that the next
morning my Lord Duke cried out three times to his
valet de chambrc, " Jernigan, Jernigan, Jernigan,
bring me my garters." '

But previously I should have mentioned the very
impolite behaviour of Mr. Burchell, who during this
discourse, sate with his face turned to the fire, and at
the conclusion of every sentence would cry out fudge,
an expression which displeased us all, and in some
measure damped the rising spirit of the conversation.

' Besides, my dear Skeggs,' continued our Peeress,
' there is nothing of this in the copy of verses that
Dr. Burdock made upon the occasion.' Fudge !

' I am surprised at that,' cried Miss Skeggs ; ' for
he seldom leaves any thing out, as he writes only for
his own amusement. But can your Ladyship favour
me with a sight of them ? ' Fudge !

' My dear creature,' replied our Peeress, ' do you
think I carry such things about me ? Though they are
very fine to be sure, and I think myself something of
a judge ; at least I know what pleases myself. Indeed
I was ever an admirer of all Doctor Burdock's little
pieces ; for except what he does, and our dear Countess
at Hanover Square, there 's nothing comes out but

459



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



the most lowest stuff in nature ; not a bit of high life
among them.' Fudge !

' Your Ladyship should except,' says t'other, ' your
own things in the Lady's Magazine. I hope you'll
say there 's nothing low lived there ? But I suppose
we are to have no more from that quarter f ' Fudge !

' Why, my dear,' says the Lady, ' you know my reader
and companion has left me, to be married to Captain
Roach, and as my poor eyes won't suffer me to write
myself, I have been for some time looking out for
another. A proper person is no easy matter to find,
and to be sure thirty pounds a year is a small stipend
for a well-bred girl of character, that can read, write,
and behave in company ; as for the chits about town,
there is no bearing them about one.' Fudge !

' That I know,' cried Miss Skeggs, ' by experience.
For of the three companions I had this last half year,
one of them refused to do plain-work an hour in the
day, another thought twenty-five guineas a year too
small a salary, and I was obliged to send away the
third, because I suspected an intrigue with the
chaplain. Virtue, my dear Lady Blarney, virtue is
worth any price ; but where is that to be found ? '
Fudge !

My wife had been for a long time all attention to
this discourse ; but was particularly struck with the
latter part of it. Thirty pounds and twenty-five
guineas a year made fifty-six pounds five shillings
English money, all which was in a manner going
a-begging, and might easily be secured in the family.
She for a moment studied my looks for approbation ;
and, to own a truth, I was of opinion, that two such
places would fit our two daughters exactly.

Vicar of Wakefield

460



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



288 Dedication of the Deserted Village
To Sir Joshua Reynolds

DEAR SIR,
I CAN have no expectations in an address of this
kind, either to add to your reputation, or to establish
my own. You can gain nothing from my admiration,
as I am ignorant of that art in which you are said to
excel ; and I may lose much by the severity of your
judgment, as few have a juster taste in poetry than
you. Setting interest therefore aside, to which I never
paid much attention, I must be indulged at present
in following my affections. The only dedication I
ever made was to my brother, because I loved him
better than most other men. He is since dead. Permit
me to inscribe this Poem to you.

How far you may be pleased with the versification
and meer mechanical parts of this attempt, I don't
pretend to enquire ; but I know you will object (and
indeed several of our best and wisest friends concur
in the opinion) that the depopulation it deplores is
no where to be seen, and the disorders it laments are
only to be found in the poet's own imagination. To
this I can scarce make any other answer than that I
sincerely believe what I have written ; that I have
taken all possible pains, in my country excursions, for
these four or five years past, to be certain of what
I alledge, and that all my views and enquiries have
led me to believe those miseries real, which I here
attempt to display. But this is not the place to enter
into an enquiry, whether the country be depopulating,
or not ; the discussion would take up much room, and
I should prove myself, at best, an indifferent politician,

461



OLIVER GOLDSMITH



to tire the reader with a long preface, when I want his
unfatigued attention to a long poem.

In regretting the depopulation of the country, I
inveigh against the increase of our luxuries ; and here
also I expect the shout of modern politicians against
me. For twenty or thirty years past, it has been the
fashion to consider luxury as one of the greatest
national advantages ; and all the wisdom of antiquity
in that particular, as erroneous. Still however, I must
remain a professed ancient on that head, and continue
to think those luxuries prejudicial to states, by which
so many vices are introduced, and so many kingdoms
have been undone. Indeed so much has been poured
out of late on the other side of the question, that,
meerly for the sake of novelty and variety, one would
sometimes wish to be in the right.
I am,

DEAR SIR,

Your sincere friend,

and ardent admirer,

Oliver Goldsmith.



EDMUND BURKE

1729-1797

28g The tA'rena, iyyo

I REMEMBER an old scholastic aphorism, which
says ' that the man who lives wholly detached from
others, must be either an angel or a devil '. When
I see in any of these detached gentlemen of our times
the angelic purity, power, and beneficence, I shall
admit them to be angels. In the mean time we are
born only to be men. We shall do enough if we form
ourselves to be good ones. It is therefore our business
462



EDMUND BURKE



carefully to cultivate in our minds, to rear to the most
perfect vigour and maturity, every sort of generous
and honest feeling that belongs to our nature. To
bring the dispositions that are lovely in private life
into the service and conduct of the commonwealth ;
so to be patriots, as not to forget we are gentlemen.
To cultivate friendships, and to incur enmities. To
have both strong, but both selected : in the one, to
be placable ; in the other, immoveable. To model
our principles to our duties and our situation. To
be fully persuaded, that all virtue which is impractic-
able is spurious ; and rather to run the risque of falling
into faults in a course which leads us to act with effect
and energy, than to loiter out our days without blame,
and without use. Public life is a situation of power and
energy ; he trespasses against his duty who sleeps upon
his watch, as well as he that goes over to the enemy.

Thoughts on the Present Dtscontents

290 Conciliation with cAmerica, 17J5

THE last cause of this disobedient spirit in the
Colonies is hardly less powerful than the rest, as
it is not merely moral, but laid deep in the natural
constitution of things. Three thousand miles of
ocean lie between you and them. No contrivance can
prevent the effect of this distance in weakening
Government. Seas roll, and months pass, between the
order and the execution ; and the want of a speedy
explanation of a single point is enough to defeat a whole
system. You have, indeed, winged ministers of
vengeance, who carry your bolts in their pounces to
the remotest verge of the sea. But there a power
steps in, that limits the arrogance of raging passions
and furious elements, and says, ' So far shalt thou go,

28 pounces) claws

463



EDMUND BURKE



and no farther.' Who are you, that should fret and
rage, and bite the chains of Nature ? Nothing worse
happens to you than does to all Nations who hare
extensive Empire ; and it happens in all the forms
into which Empire can be thrown. In large bodies,
the circulation of power must be less vigorous at the
extremities. Nature has said it. The Turk cannot
govern /Egypt, and Arabia, and Curdistan, as he
governs Thrace ; nor has he the same dominion in
Crimea and Algiers, which he has at Brusa and
Smyrna. Despotism itself is obliged to truck and
huckster. The Sultan gets such obedience as he can.
He governs with a loose rein, that he may govern
at all ; and the whole of the force and vigour of his
authority in his centre is derived from a prudent
relaxation in all his borders. Spain, in her provinces,
is, perhaps, not so well obeyed as you are in yours. She
complies too ; she submits ; she watches times.
This is the immutable condition, the eternal Law, of
extensive and detached Empire.

Speech in the House of Commons

291 Speech at Bristol on declining
the Poll, 1780

Bristol, Saturday, Sept. 9, 1780.
This morning the Sheriff and Candidates assembled as usual at the
Council House, and from thence proceeded to Guildhall. Procla-
mation being made for the electors to appear and give their votes,
Mr. Burke stood forward on the Hustings, surrounded by a
great number of the Corporation and other principal citizens,
and addressed himself to the whole assembly as follows : —

GENTLEMEN,
I decline the election. It has ever been my

rule through life, to observe a proportion between my
464



EDMUND BURKE



efforts and my objects. I have never been remarkable
for a bold, active, and sanguine pursuit of advantages
that are personal to myself.

I have not canvassed the whole of this city in form.
But I have taken such a view of it as satisfies my own
mind, that your choice will not ultimately fall upon
me. Your city, Gentlemen, is in a state of miserable
distraction ; and I am resolved to withdraw whatever
share my pretensions may have had in its unhappy
divisions. I have not been in haste ; I have tried all
prudent means ; I have waited for the effect of all
contingencies. If I were fond of a contest, by the
partiality of my numerous friends (whom you know
to be among the most weighty and respectable people
of the city), I have the means of a sharp one in my
hands. But I thought it far better with my strength
unspent, and my reputation unimpaired, to do, early
and from foresight, that which I might be obliged to
do from necessity at last.

I am not in the least surprised, nor in the least angry
at this view of things. I have read the book of life
for a long time, and I have read other books a little.
Nothing has happened to me, but what has happened
to men much better than me, and in times and in
nations full as good as the age and country that we
live in. To say that I am no way concerned, would
be neither decent nor true. The representation of
Bristol was an object on many accounts dear to me ;
and I certainly should very far prefer it to any other
in the kingdom. My habits are made to it ; and it
is in general more unpleasant to be rejected after long
trial, than not to be chosen at all.

But, Gentlemen, I will see nothing except your
former kindness, and I will give way to no other

465



EDMUND BURKE



sentiments than those of gratitude. From the bottom
of my heart I thank you for what you have done for
me. You have given me a long term, which is now
expired. I have performed the conditions, and enjoyed
all the profits to the full ; and I now surrender your
estate into your hands, without being in a single tile
or a single stone impaired or wasted by my use. I
have served the public for fifteen years. I have served
you in particular for six. What is passed is well stored.
It is safe, and out of the power of fortune. What is to
come, is in wiser hands than ours : and he, in whose
hands it is, best knows whether it is best for you and
me that I should be in Parliament, or even in the world.

Gentlemen, the melancholy event of yesterday reads
to us an awful lesson against being too much troubled
about any of the objects of ordinary ambition. The
worthy Gentleman, who has been snatched from us at
the moment of the election, and in the middle of the
contest, whilst his desires were as warm, and his hopes
as eager as ours, has feelingly told us, what shadows we
are, and what shadows we pursue.

It has been usual for a candidate who declines, to
take his leave by a letter to the Sheriffs ; but I received
your trust in the face of day : and in the face of day
I accept your dismission. I am not, — I am not at all
ashamed to look upon you ; nor can my presence
discompose the order of business here. I humbly and
respectfully take my leave of the sheriffs, the candidates,
and the electors, wishing heartily that the choice may
be for the best, at a time which calls, if ever time did
call, for service that is not nominal. It is no plaything
you are about. I tremble when I consider the trust
I have presumed to ask. I confided perhaps too much
in my intentions. They were really fair and upright ;
466



EDMUND BURKE



and I am bold to say that I ask no ill thing for you,
when on parting from this place I pray that whomever
you chuse to succeed me, he may resemble me exactly
in all things, except in my abilities to serve, and my
fortune to please you.

Speech at Bristol

292 SMiarie <iAntoinette

IT is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the
queen of France, then the dauphiness, at Versailles ;
and surely never lighted on this orb, which she hardly
seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw her
just above the horizon, decorating and cheering the
elevated sphere she just began to move in ; glittering
like the morning star, full of life, and splendor, and
joy. Oh ! what a revolution ! and what an heart
must I have, to contemplate without emotion that
elevation and that fall ! Little did I dream when she
added titles of veneration to those of enthusiastic,
distant, respectful love, that she should ever be obliged
to carry the sharp antidote against disgrace concealed
in that bosom ; little did I dream that I should have
lived to see such disasters fallen upon her in a nation
of gallant men, in a nation of men of honour and of
cavaliers. I thought ten thousand swords must have
leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look
that threatened her with insult. — But the age of
chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, ceconomists, and
calculators, has succeeded ; and the glory of Europe
is extinguished for ever. Never, never more, shall
we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that
proud submission, that dignified obedience, that
subordination of the heart, which kept alive, even in
servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom. The

467



EDMUND BURKE



unbought grace of life, the cheap defence of nations,
the nurse of manly sentiment and heroic enterprize,
is gone ! It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that
chastity of honour, which felt a stain like a wound,
which inspired courage whilst it mitigated ferocity,
which ennobled whatever it touched, and under which
vice itself lost half its evil, by losing all its grossness.

Reflections on the Revolution in France

293 1 The Labouring c Poor'

AN untimely shower, or an unseasonable drought ;
XjL a frost too long continued, or too suddenly
broken up, with rain and tempest ; the blight of the
spring, or the smut of the harvest ; will do more to
cause the distress of the belly, than all the contrivances
of all Statesmen can do to relieve it. Let Government
protect and encourage industry, secure property,
repress violence, and discountenance fraud, it is all
that they have to do. In other respects, the less they
meddle in these affairs the better ; the rest is in the
hands of our Master and theirs. We are in a constitu-
tion of things wherein ' Modo sol ntmius, nimius modo
corripit imber.' But I will push this matter no further.
As I have said a good deal upon it at various times
during my publick service, and have lately written
something on it, which may yet see the light, I shall
content myself now with observing, that the vigorous
and laborious class of life has lately got from the
ban ton of the humanity of this day, the name of the
' labouring poor.' We have heard many plans for the
relief of the ' Labouring Poor.' This puling jargon is
not as innocent as it is foolish. In meddling with
great affairs, weakness is never innoxious. Hitherto
468



EDMUND BURKE

the name of Poor (in the sense in which it is used to
excite compassion) has not been used for those who
can, but for those who cannot labour — for the sick
and infirm ; for orphan infancy ; for languishing and
decrepid age : but when we affect to pity as poor,
those who must labour or the world cannot exist, we
are trifling with the condition of mankind. It is
the common doom of man that he must eat his bread
by the sweat of his brow, that is, by the sweat of his
body, or the sweat of his mind. If this toil was inflicted
as a curse, it is as might be expected from the curses
of the Father of all Blessings — it is tempered with
many alleviations, many comforts. Every attempt to
fly from it, and to refuse the very terms of our existence,
becomes much more truly a curse, and heavier pains
and penalties fall upon those who would elude the
tasks which are put upon them by the great Master
Workman of the World, who in his dealings with his
creatures sympathizes with their weakness, and speaking
of a creation wrought by mere will out of nothing,
speaks of six days of labour and one of rest. I do not
call a healthy young man, chearful in his mind, and
vigorous in his arms — I cannot call such a man, poor ;
I cannot pity my kind as a kind, merely because they
are men. This affected pity only tends to dissatisfy
them with their condition, and to teach them to seek
resources where no resources arc to be found — in
something else than their own industry, and frugality,
and sobriety. Whatever may be the intention (which,
because I do not know, I cannot dispute) of those who
would discontent mankind by this strange pity, they
act towards us, in the consequences, as if they were
our worst enemies.

Letters on a Regicide Peace
469



EDMUND BURKE



294 Thomas T'aine

I HAVE a great opinion of Thomas Paine, and of
all his productions. I remember his having been
one of the Committee for forming one of their annual
Constitutions, I mean the admirable Constitution of
1793 — after having been a Chamber Counsel to the
no less admirable Constitution of 1791. This pious
patriot has his eyes still directed to his dear native
country, notwithstanding her ingratitude to so kind
a benefactor. This outlaw of England, and lawgiver
to France, is now, in secret probably, trying his hand
again ; and inviting us to him by making his Constitu-
tion such, as may give his disciples in England some
plausible pretext for going into the house that he has
opened. We have discovered, it seems, that all, which
the boasted wisdom of our ancestors has laboured to
bring to perfection for six or seven centuries, is nearly
or altogether matched in six or seven days, at the
leisure hours and sober intervals of Citizen Thomas
Paine.

But though the treacherous tapster Thomas
Hangs a new Angel two doors from us,
As fine as daubers' hands can make it,
In hopes that strangers may mistake it ,
We think it both a shame and sin
To quit the good old Angel Inn.

Indeed in this good old House, where every thing, at
least, is well aired, I shall be content to put up my
fatigued horses, and here take a bed for the long night
that begins to darken upon me. Had I, however, the
honour (I must now call it so) of being a Member of
any of the Constitutional Clubs, I should think I had
carried my point most completely. It is clear, by the
applauses bestowed on what the Author calls this
470



EDMUND BURKE



new Constitution, a mixed Oligarchy, that the differ-
ence between the Clubbists and the old adherents to
the Monarchy of this country is hardly worth a scuffle.
Let it depart in peace, and light lie the earth on the
British Constitution !

Letters on a Regicide Peace

295 Windsor Qastle and the ''Bedford
Level

SUCH are their ideas : such their religion, and such
their law. But as to our country and our race, as
long as the well-compacted structure of our church
and state, the sanctuary, the holy of holies of that
ancient law, defended by reverence, defended by
power, a fortress at once and a temple, shall stand
inviolate on the brow of the British Sion — as long as
the British monarchy, not more limited than fenced
by the orders of the state, shall, like the proud Keep of
Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, and girt
with the double belt of its kindred and coeval towers,
as long as this awful structure shall oversee and guard
the subjected land — so long the mounds and dykes
of the low, fat, Bedford level will have nothing to
fear from all the pickaxes of all the levellers of France.
As long as our Sovereign Lord the King, and his faithful
subjects, the Lords and Commons of this realm, — the
triple cord, which no man can break ; the solemn,
sworn, constitutional frank-pledge of this nation ; the
firm guarantees of each others' being, and each others'
rights ; the joint and several securities, each in its
place and order, for every kind and every quality, of
property and of dignity : — as long as these endure,

471



EDMUND BURKE



so long the Duke of Bedford is safe : and we are all
safe together — the high from the blights of envy and
the spoliations of rapacity ; the low from the iron
hand of oppression and the insolent spurn of contempt.
Amen ! and so be it : and so it will be,

Dum domus Aeneae Capitoli immobile saxum
Accolet , imperiumque pater Romanus habebit.

Letter to a Noble Lord

WILLIAM COWPER

1731-1800

2g6 ^collections of <£Margate

WHEN I was at Margate, it was an excursion of
pleasure to go to see Ramsgate. The pier, I
remember, was accounted a most excellent piece of
stone-work, and such I found it. By this time, I
suppose, it is finished ; and surely it is no small ad-
vantage, that you have an opportunity of observing
how nicely those great stones are put together, as
often as you please, without either trouble or expense.
But you think Margate more lively. So is a Cheshire
cheese full of mites more lively than a sound one : but
that very liveliness only proves its rottenness. I re-
member, too, that Margate, though full of company,
was generally filled with such company, as people who
were nice in the choice of their company, were rather
fearful of keeping company with. The hoy went to
London every week, loaded with mackerel and herrings,
and returned loaded with company. The cheapness of
the conveyance made it equally commodious for Dead
fish and Lively company. So, perhaps, your solitude
at Ramsgate may turn out another advantage ; at least
I should think it one.
47*



WILLIAM COWPER



There was not, at that time, much to be seen in the
Isle of Thanet, besides the beauty of the country, and
the fine prospects of the sea, which are nowhere sur-
passed except in the Isle of Wight, or upon some parts
of the coast of Hampshire. One sight, however, I
remember, engaged my curiosity, and I went to see it :
— a fine piece of ruins, built by the late Lord Holland, at
a great expense, which, the day after I saw it, tumbled
down for nothing. Perhaps, therefore, it is still a ruin ;
and if it is, I would advise you by all means to visit it,
as it must have been much improved by this fortunate
incident. It is hardly possible to put stones together
with that air of wild and magnificent disorder which
they are sure to acquire by falling of their own accord.

We heartily wish that Mrs. Unwin may receive the
utmost benefit of bathing. At the same time we
caution you against the use of it, however the heat of
the weather may seem to recommend it. It is not safe
for thin habits, hectically inclined.

I remember, — (the fourth and last thing I mean to
remember upon this occasion,) that Sam Cox the
counsel, walking by the seaside as if absorbed in deep
contemplation, was questioned about what he was
musing on. He replied, ' I was wondering that such
an almost infinite and unwieldy element should pro-
duce a sprat.'' Our love attends your whole party. —
Yours affectionately, W. C.

Letter to the Reverend William Unwtn, July Iyyg

2gj The Qolubriad

IT is a sort of paradox, but it is true : we are never
more in danger than when we think ourselves most
secure, nor in reality more secure than when we seem

473



WILLIAM COWPER



to be most in danger. Both sides of this apparent
contradiction were lately verified in my experience. —
Passing from the greenhouse to the barn, I saw three
kittens (for we have so many in our retinue) looking
with fixed attention at something, which lay on the
threshold of a door, coiled up. I took but little notice
of them at first ; but a loud hiss engaged me to attend
more closely, when behold — a viper ! the largest
I remember to have seen, rearing itself, darting its
forked tongue, and ejaculating the afore-mentioned
hiss at the nose of a kitten almost in contact with his
lips. I ran into the hall for a hoe with a long handle,
with which I intended to assail him, and returning in
a few seconds missed him : he was gone, and I feared
had escaped me. Still however the kitten sat watching
immoveably upon the same spot. I concluded, there-
fore, that, sliding between the door and the threshold,
he had found his way out of the garden into the yard.
I went round immediately, and there found him in
close conversation with the old cat, whose curiosity
being excited by so novel an appearance, inclined her
to pat his head repeatedly with her fore foot ; with
her claws however sheathed, and not in anger ; but
in the way of philosophical inquiry and examination.
To prevent her falling a victim to so laudable an
exercise of her talents, I interposed in a moment with
the hoe, and performed upon him an act of decapita-
tion, which though not immediately mortal, proved
so in the end. Had he slid into the passages, where
it is dark, or had he, when in the yard, met with no
interruption from the cat, and secreted himself in
any of the outhouses, it is hardly possible but that
some of the family must have been bitten ; he might
have been trodden upon without being perceived,
474



WILLIAM COWPER



and have slipped away before the sufferer could have
well distinguished what foe had wounded him. Three
years ago we discovered one in the same place, which
the barber slew with a trowel.

Letter to the Reverend William Utncm, j Aug 1782

298 <sA Candidate j or Parliament

AS when the sea is uncommonly agitated, the water
jLX. finds its way into creeks and holes of rocks, which
in its calmer state it never reaches, in like manner the
effect of these turbulent times is felt even at Orchard
side, where in general we live as undisturbed by the
political element, as shrimps or cockles that have
been accidentally deposited in some hollow beyond the
water mark, by the usual dashing of the waves. We
were sitting yesterday after dinner, the two ladies
and myself, very composedly, and without the least
apprehension of any such intrusion in our snug parlour,
one lady knitting, the other netting, and the gentleman
winding worsted, when to our unspeakable surprise
a mob appeared before the window ; a smart rap was
heard at the door, the boys halloo'd, and the maid
announced Mr. Grenville.

Puss was unfortunately let out of her box, so that
the candidate, with all his good friends at his heels, was
refused admittance at the grand entry, and referred to
the back door, as the only possible way of approach.

Candidates are creatures not very susceptible of
affronts, and would rather, I suppose, climb in at
a window, than be absolutely excluded. In a minute,
the yard, the kitchen, and the parlour, were filled.
Mr. Grenville, advancing toward me, shook me by
the hand with a degree of cordiality that was extremely

475



WILLIAM COWPER



seducing. As soon as he and as many more as could
find chairs were seated, he began to open the intent of
his visit. I told him I had no vote, for which he
readily gave me credit. I assured him I had no influ-
ence, which he was not equally inclined to believe, and
the less, no doubt, because Mr. Ashburner, the draper,
addressing himself to me at this moment, informed
me that I had a great deal. Supposing that I could
not be possessed of such a treasure without knowing it,
I ventured to confirm my first assertion, by saying,
that if I had any I was utterly at a loss to imagine
where it could be, or wherein it consisted. Thus ended
the conference. Mr. Grenville squeezed me by the
hand again, kissed the ladies, and withdrew. He kissed
likewise the maid in the kitchen, and seemed upon the
whole a most loving, kissing, kind-hearted gentleman.
He is very young, genteel, and handsome. He has
a pair of very good eyes in his head, which not being
sufficient as it should seem for the many nice and diffi-
cult purposes of a senator, he has a third also, which
he wore suspended by a riband from his button-hole.
The boys halloo'd, the dogs barked, Puss scampered,
the hero, with his long train of obsequious followers,
withdrew. We made ourselves very merry with the
adventure, and in a short time settled into our former
tranquillity, never probably to be thus interrupted
more.

Letter to the Reverend John Newlon, 29 March 1784

2gg Qountryside ^Music

MY greenhouse is never so pleasant as when we are
just upon the point of being turned out of it.
The gentleness of the autumnal suns, and the calmness
476



WILLIAM COWPER

of this latter season, make it a much more agreeable
retreat than we ever find it in summer ; when, the
winds being generally brisk, we cannot cool it by
admitting a sufficient quantity of air, without being
at the same time incommoded by it. But now I sit
with all the windows and the door wide open, and am
regaled with the scent of every flower in a garden as
full of flowers as I have known how to make it. We
keep no bees, but if I lived in a hive I should hardly
hear more of their music. All the bees in the neigh-
bourhood resort to a bed of mignonette, opposite to
the window, and pay me for the honey they get out
of it by a hum, which, though rather monotonous, is
as agreeable to my ear as the whistling of my linnets.
All the sounds that nature utters are delightful, — at
least in this country. I should not perhaps find the
roaring of lions in Africa, or of bears in Russia, very
pleasing ; but I know no beast in England whose voice
I do not account musical, save and except always the
braying of an ass. The notes of all our birds and fowls
please me, without one exception. I should not indeed
think of keeping a goose in a cage, that I might hang
him up in the parlour for the sake of his melody, but
a goose upon a common, or in a farm-yard, is no bad
performer ; and as to insects, if the black beetle, and
beetles indeed of all hues, will keep out of my way,
I have no objection to any of the rest ; on the con-
trary, in whatever key they sing, from the gnat's
fine treble to the bass of the humble-bee, I admire
them all.

Letter to the Reverend John Newton, 18 Sept. 1784



477



WILLIAM COWPER



300 The ^Promised Visit

AND now, my dear, let me tell you once more,
£\_ that your kindness in promising us a visit has
charmed us both. I shall see you again. I shall hear
your voice. We shall take walks together. I will
show you my prospects, the hovel, the alcove, the
Ouse, and its banks, everything that I have described.
I anticipate the pleasure of those days not very far
distant, and feel a part of it at this moment. Talk not
of an inn ! Mention it not for your life ! We have
never had so many visitors, but we could easily
accommodate them all ; though we have received
Unwin, and his wife, and his sister, and his son all at
once. My dear, I will not let you come till the end of
May, or beginning of June, because before that time
my greenhouse will not be ready to receive us, and it
is the only pleasant room belonging to us. When the
plants go out, we go in. I line it with mats, and spread
the floor with mats ; and there you shall sit with
a bed of mignonette at your side, and a hedge of honey-
suckles, roses, and jasmine ; and I will make you
a bouquet of myrtle every day. Sooner than the time
I mention the country will not be in complete beauty.
And I will tell you what you shall find at your first
entrance. Imprimts, as soon as you have entered the
vestibule, if you cast a look on either side of you, you
shall see on the right hand a box of my making. It is
the box in which have been lodged all my hares, and
in which lodges Puss at present : but he, poor fellow,
is worn out with age, and promises to die before you
can see him. On the right hand stands a cupboard, the
work of the same author ; it was once a dove-cage,
but I transformed it. Opposite to you stands a table,
478



WILLIAM COWPER



which I also made : but a merciless servant having
scrubbed it until it became paralytic, it serves no
purpose now but of ornament ; and all my clean shoes
stand under it. On the left hand, at the further end
of this superb vestibule, you will find the door of the
parlour, into which I will conduct you, and where
I will introduce you to Mrs. Unwin, unless we should
meet her before, and where we will be as happy as
the day is long. Order yourself, my Cousin, to the
Swan at Newport, and there you shall find me ready
to conduct you to Olney.

Letter to Lady Hesketh, 9 Feb. Ij86



301 In at the Death

ONE day last week, Mrs. Unwin and I, having
taken our morning walk and returning home-
ward through the wilderness, met the Throckmortons.
A minute after we had met them, we heard the cry
of hounds at no great distance, and mounting the broad
stump of an elm which had been felled, and by the
aid of which we were enabled to look over the wall,
we saw them. They were all at that time in our
orchard ; presently we heard a terrier, belonging to
Mrs. Throckmorton, which you may remember by
the name of Fury, yelping with much vehemence, and
saw her running through the thickets within a few
yards of us at her utmost speed, as if in pursuit of
something which we doubted not was the fox. Before
we could reach the other end of the wilderness, th«
hounds entered also ; and when we arrived at the gate
which opens into the grove, there we found the whole
weary cavalcade assembled. The huntsman dismount-

479



WILLIAM COWPER



ing, begged leave to follow his hounds on foot, for
he was sure, he said, that they had killed him : a con-
clusion which I suppose he drew from their profound
silence. He was accordingly admitted, and with
a sagacity that would not have dishonoured the best
hound in the world, pursuing precisely the same track
which the fox and the dogs had taken, though he had
never had a glimpse of either after their first entrance
through the rails, arrived where he found the slaugh-
tered prey. He soon produced dead reynard, and
rejoined us in the grove with all his dogs about him.
Having an opportunity to see a ceremony, which I was
pretty sure would never fall in my way again, I deter-
mined to stay and to notice all that passed with the
most minute attention. The huntsman having by
the aid of a pitchfork lodged reynard on the arm of an
elm, at the height of about nine feet from the ground,
there left him for a considerable time. The gentlemen
sat on their horses contemplating the fox, for which
they had toiled so hard, and the hounds assembled
at the foot of the tree, with faces not less expressive
of the most rational delight, contemplated the same
object. The huntsman remounted ; cut off a foot,
and threw it to the hounds ; — one of them swallowed
it whole like a bolus. He then once more alighted
and drawing down the fox by the hinder legs, desired
the people, who were by this time rather numerous,
to open a lane for him to the right and left. He was
instantly obeyed, when throwing the fox to the dis-
tance of some yards, and screaming like a fiend, ' tear
him to pieces ' — at least six times repeatedly, he
consigned him over absolutely to the pack, who in
a few minutes devoured him completely. Thus, my
dear, as Virgil says, what none of the gods could have
480



WILLIAM COWPER



ventured to promise me, time itself, pursuing its
accustomed course, has of its own accord presented
me with. I have been in at the death of a fox, and you
now know as much of the matter as I, who am as well
informed as any sportsman in England. — Yours, W. C.

Letter to Lady Hesketh, 3 Mar. 1788



EDWARD GIBBON

1737-1794

302 The Two <tAntonines

AS soon as Hadrian's passion was either gratified or
X\, disappointed, he resolved to deserve the thanks
of posterity by placing the most exalted merit on the
Roman throne. His discerning eye easily discovered
a senator about fifty years of age, blameless in all the
offices of life ; and a youth of about seventeen, whose
riper years opened the fair prospect of every virtue :
the elder of these was declared the son and successor
of Hadrian, on condition, however, that he himself
should immediately adopt the younger. The two
Antonines (for it is of them that we are now speaking)
governed the Roman world forty-two years with the
same invariable spirit of wisdom and virtue. Although
Pius had two sons, he preferred the welfare of Rome
to the interest of his family, gave his daughter Faustina
in marriage to young Marcus, obtained from the senate
the tribunitian and proconsular powers, and, with a
noble disdain, or rather ignorance, of jealousy, asso-
ciated him to all the labours of government. Marcus,
on the other hand, revered the character of his bene-
factor, loved him as a parent, obeyed him as his
sovereign, and, after he was no more, regulated his

2830 R 481



EDWARD GIBBON



own administration by the example and maxims of
his predecessor. Their united reigns are possibly the
only period of history in which the happiness of
a great people was the sole object of government.

Titus Antoninus Pius had been justly denominated
a second Numa. The same love of religion, justice,
and peace, was the distinguishing characteristic of
both princes. But the situation of the latter opened
a much larger field for the exercise of those virtues.
Numa could only prevent a few neighbouring villages
from plundering each other's harvests. Antoninus
diffused order and tranquillity over the greatest part
of the earth. His reign is marked by the rare advantage
of furnishing very few materials for history ; which
is, indeed, little more than the register of the crimes,
follies, and misfortunes of mankind. In private life
he was an amiable as well as a good man. The native
simplicity of his virtue was a stranger to vanity or
affectation. He enjoyed with moderation the con-
veniences of his fortune, and the innocent pleasures
of society ; and the benevolence of his soul displayed
itself in a cheerful serenity of temper.

The virtue of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus was of
a severer and more laborious kind. It was the well-
earned harvest of many a learned conference, of many
a patient lecture, and many a midnight lucubration.
At the age of twelve years he embraced the rigid
system of the Stoics, which taught him to submit his
body to his mind, his passions to his reason ; to con-
sider virtue as the only good, vice as the only evil, all
things external as things indifferent. His meditations,
composed in the tumult of a camp, are still extant; and
he even condescended to give lessons on philosophy, in
a more public manner than was perhaps consistent with
482



EDWARD GIBBON



the modesty of a sage or the dignity of an emperor.
But his life was the noblest commentary on the
precepts of Zeno. He was severe to himself, indulgent
to the imperfection of others, just and beneficent to
all mankind. He regretted that Avidius Cassius, who
excited a rebellion in Syria, had disappointed him, by
a voluntary death, of the pleasure of converting an
enemy into a friend ; and he justified the sincerity
of that sentiment, by moderating the zeal of the
senate against the adherents of the traitor. War he
detested, as the disgrace and calamity of human nature ;
but when the necessity of a just defence called upon
him to take up arms, he readily exposed his person to
eight winter campaigns on the frozen banks of the
Danube, the severity of which was at last fatal to the
weakness of his constitution. His memory was revered
by a grateful posterity, and above a century after his
death many persons preserved the image of Marcus
Antoninus among those of their household gods.

If a man were called to fix the period in the histon'
of the world during which the condition of the hu*
race was most happy and prosperous, he would
out hesitation, name that which elapsed frc
of Domitian to the accession of Commo''
extent of the Roman empire was govc
power, under the guidance of virtue
armies were restrained by the firm
four successive emperors, whos<
authority commanded involuntary
of the civil administration were ca
Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, and i
delighted in the image of liber
with considering themselves
ministers of the laws. Such



EDWARD GIBBON



honour of restoring the republic, had the Romans of
their days been capable of enjoying a rational freedom.

Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire

303 Qonstantinople

THE winding channel through which the waters
of the Euxine flow with a rapid and incessant
course towaids the Mediterranean received the appella-
tion of Bosphorus, a name not less celebrated in the
history than in the fables of antiquity. A crowd of
temples and of votive altars, profusely scattered along
its steep and woody banks, attested the unskilfulness,
the terrors, and the devotion of the Grecian navigators,
who, after the example of the Argonauts, explored
the dangers of the inhospitable Euxine. . .

The harbour of Constantinople, which may be con-
sidered as an arm of the Bosphorus, obtained, in a very
remote period, the denomination of the Golden Horn.
T'he curve which it describes might be compared to
horn of a stag, or, as it should seem, with more
T. to that of an ox. The epithet of golden
'•'e of the riches which every wind wafted
*■ distant countries into the secure and
"•f Constantinople. The river Lycus,
flux of two little streams, pours into
petual supply of fresh water, which
e bottom and to invite the periodical
ek their retreat in that convenient
situdes of tides are scarcely felt in
••ant depth of the harbour allows
1 the quays without the assistance
een observed that in many places
ay rest their prows against the



EDWARD GIBBON

houses, while their sterns are floating in the water.
From the mouth of the Lycus to that of the harbour
this arm of the Bosphorus is more than seven miles in
length. The entrance is about five hundred yards
broad, and a strong chain could be occasionally drawn
across it, to guard the port and city from the attack of
an hostile navy.

Between the Bosphorus and the Hellespont, the
shores of Europe and Asia receding on either side
inclose the sea of Marmara, which was known to the
ancients by the denomination of Propontis. The navi-
gation from the issue of the Bosphorus to the entrance
of the Hellespont is about one hundred and twenty
miles. Those who steer their westward course through
the middle of the Propontis may at once descry the
high lands of Thrace and Bithynia, and never lose
sight of the lofty summit of Mount Olympus, covered
with eternal snows. They leave on the left a deep
gulf, at the bottom of which Nicomedia was seated, the
imperial residence of Diocletian ; and they pass the
small islands of Cyzicus and Proconnesus before they
cast anchor at Gallipoli ; where the sea, which
separates Asia from Europe, is again contracted into
a narrow channel. . .

We are at present qualified to view the advantageous
position of Constantinople ; which appears to have
been formed by Nature for the centre and capital of
a great monarchy. Situated in the forty-first degree
of latitude, the Imperial city commanded, from her
seven hills, the opposite shores of Europe and Asia ;
the climate was healthy and temperate, the soil
fertile, the harbour secure and capacious ; and the
approach on the side of the continent was of small
extent and easy defence. The Bosphorus and Helles-

48s



EDWARD GIBBON

pont may be considered as the two gates of Constanti-
nople ; and the prince who possessed those important
passages could always shut them against a naval enemy
and open them to the fleets of commerce. The
preservation of the eastern provinces may, in some
degree, be ascribed to the policy of Constantine, as
the Barbarians of the Euxine, who in the preceding
age had poured their armaments into the heart of
the Mediterranean, soon desisted from the exercise
of piracy, and despaired of forcing this insurmountable
barrier. When the gates of the Hellespont and
Bosphorus were shut, the capital still enjoyed, within
their spacious inclosure, every production which could
supply the wants, or gratify the luxury, of its numerous
inhabitants. The sea-coast of Thrace and Bithynia,
which languish under the weight of Turkish oppression,
still exhibits a rich prospect of vineyards, of gardens,
and of plentiful harvests ; and the Propontis has ever
been renowned for an inexhaustible store of the most
exquisite fish, that are taken in their stated seasons
without skill and almost without labour. But, when
the passages of the Straits were thrown open for trade,
they alternately admitted the natural and artificial
riches of the north and south, of the Euxine, and of
the Mediterranean. Whatever rude commodities were
collected in the forests of Germany and Scythia, as far
as the sources of the Tanais and the Borysthenes ;
whatsoever was manufactured by the skill of Europe
or Asia ; the corn of Egypt, and the gems and spices
of the farthest India, were brought by the varying
winds into the port of Constantinople, which, for
many ages, attracted the commerce of the ancient
world.

Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire

486



EDWARD GIBBON



304 Unworldliness of the Early Christians

IT is a very honourable circumstance for the morals
of the primitive Christians, that even their faults,
or rather errors, were derived from an excess of virtue.
The bishops and doctors of the church, whose evidence
attests, and whose authority might influence, the pro-
fessions, the principles, and even the practice, of their
contemporaries, had studied the scriptures with less
skill than devotion, and they often received, in the
most literal sense, those rigid precepts of Christ and
the apostles to which the prudence of succeeding
commentators has applied a looser and more figurative
mode of interpretation. Ambitious to exalt the per-
fection of the gospel above the wisdom of philosophy,
the zealous fathers have carried the duties of self-
mortification, of purity, and of patience, to a height
which it is scarcely possible to attain, and much less
to preserve, in our present state of weakness and
corruption. A doctrine so extraordinary and so sub-
lime must inevitably command the veneration of the
people ; but it was ill calculated to obtain the suffrage
of those worldly philosophers who, in the conduct of
this transitory life, consult only the feelings of nature
and the interest of society.

There are two very natural propensities which we
may distinguish in the most virtuous and liberal dis-
positions, the love of pleasure and the love of action.
If the former be refined by art and learning, improved
by the charms of social intercourse, and corrected by
a just regard to economy, to health, and to reputation,
it is productive of the greatest part of the happiness
of private life. The love of action is a principle of a
much stronger and more doubtful nature. It often

487



EDWARD GIBBON



leads to anger, to ambition, and to revenge ; but, when
it is guided by the sense of propriety and benevolence,
it becomes the parent of every virtue ; and, if those
virtues are accompanied with equal abilities, a family,
a state, or an empire may be indebted for their safety
and prosperity to the undaunted courage of a single
man. To the love of pleasure we may therefore ascribe
most of the agreeable, to the love of action we may
attribute most of the useful and respectable qualifica-
tions. The character in which both the one and the
other should be united and harmonised would seem to
constitute the most perfect idea of human nature.
The insensible and inactive disposition, which should
be supposed alike destitute of both, would be rejected,
by the common consent of mankind, as utterly incap-
able of procuring any happiness to the individual, or
any public benefit to the world. But it was not in
this world that the primitive Christians were desirous
of making themselves either agreeable or useful.

Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire

505 On his Life-JVork

1

IT was at Rome, on the 15th of October 1764, as
I sat musing amidst the ruins of the Capitol, while
the bare-footed fryars were singing vespers in the
Temple of Jupiter, that the idea of writing the decline
and fall of the city first started to my mind. But my
original plan was circumscribed to the decay of the
city rather than of the empire : and, though my
reading and reflections began to point towards that
object, some years elapsed, and several avocations
intervened, before I was seriously engaged in the
execution of that laborious work.
488



EDWARD GIBBON



a

I have presumed to mark the moment of conception :
I shall now commemorate the hour of my final deliver-
ance. It was on the day, or rather night, of the
27th of June 1787, between the hours of eleven and
twelve, that I wrote the last lines of the last page, in
a summer-house in my garden. After laying down
my pen, I took several turns in a berceau, or covered
walk of acacias, which commands a prospect of the
country, the lake, and the mountains. The air was
temperate, the sky was serene, the silver orb of the
moon was reflected from the waters, and all nature
was silent. I will not dissemble the first emotions of
joy on the recovery of my freedom, and, perhaps, the
establishment of my fame. But my pride was soon
humbled, and a sober melancholy was spread over my
mind, by the idea that I had taken an everlasting leave
of an old and agreeable companion, and that whatsoever
might be the future date of my History, the life of
the historian must be short and precarious.

Memoirs of my Life and Writings

JAMES BOSWELL

1740-1795

306 'Johnson at Oxford

HE, however, went to Oxford, and was entered
a Commoner of Pembroke College on the 31st of
October 1728, being then in his nineteenth year.

The Reverend Dr. Adams, who afterwards presided
over Pembroke College with universal esteem, told
me he was present, and gave me some account of what
passed on the night of Johnson's arrival at Oxford.
On that evening, his father, who had anxiously

489



JAMES BOS WELL



accompanied him, found means to have him introduced
to Mr. Jorden, who was to be his tutor. His being
put under any tutor reminds us of what Wood says
of Robert Burton, author of the Anatomy of Melan-
choly, when elected student of Christ Church : ' for
form's sake, though he wanted not a tutor, he was put
under the tuition of Dr. John Bancroft, afterwards
Bishop of Oxon.'

His father seemed very full of the merits of his
son, and told the company he was a good scholar,
and a poet, and wrote Latin verses. His figure and
manner appeared strange to them ; but he behaved
modestly, and sat silent, till upon something which
occurred in the course of conversation, he suddenly
struck in and quoted Macrobius ; and thus he gave
the first impression of that more extensive reading
in which he had indulged himself.

His tutor, Mr. Jorden, fellow of Pembroke, was
not, it seems, a man of such abilities as we should
conceive requisite for the instructor of Samuel Johnson,
who gave me the following account of him. ' He was
a very worthy man, but a heavy man, and I did not
profit much by his instructions. Indeed, I did not
attend him much. The first day after I came to
college I waited upon him, and then stayed away four.
On the sixth, Mr. Jorden asked me why I had not
attended. I answered I had been sliding in Christ
Church meadow. And this I said with as much
nonchalance as I am now talking to you. I had no
notion that I was wrong or irreverent to my tutor.'
Boswell : ' That, Sir, was great fortitude of mind.'
Johnson : ' No, Sir ; stark insensibility.'

He had a love and respect for Jorden, not for his
literature, but for his worth. ' Whenever (said he)
490



JAMES BOSWELL

a young man becomes Jorden's pupil, he becomes
his son.' . . .

No man had a more ardent love of literature, or
a higher respect for it than Johnson. His apartment
in Pembroke College was that upon the second floor,
over the gateway. The enthusiasts of learning will
ever contemplate it with veneration. One day, while
he was sitting in it quite alone, Dr. Panting, then
master of the College, whom he called ' a fine Jacobite
fellow ', overheard him uttering this soliloquy in his
strong, emphatick voice : ' Well, I have a mind to
see what is done in other places of learning. I'll go
and visit the Universities abroad. I'll go to France
and Italy. I'll go to Padua. — And I'll mind my
business. For an Athenian blockhead is the worst of
all blockheads.'

Dr. Adams told me that Johnson, while he was at
Pembroke College, ' was caressed and loved by all
about him, was a gay and frolicksome fellow, and
passed there the happiest part of his life.' But this
is a striking proof of the fallacy of appearances, and
how little any of us know of the real internal state
even of those whom we see most frequently ; for the
truth is, that he was then depressed by poverty, and
irritated by disease. When I mentioned to him this
account as given me by Dr. Adams, he said, ' Ah, Sir,
I was mad and violent. It was bitterness which they
mistook for frolick. I was miserably poor, and I thought
to fight my way by my literature and my wit ; so
I disregarded all power and all authority.' . . .

I do not find that he formed any close intimacies
with his fellow collegians. But Dr. Adams told me
that he contracted a love and regard for Pembroke
College, which he retained to the last. A short time

491



JAMES BOSWELL

before his death he sent to that College a present of
all his works, to be deposited in their library ; and he
had thoughts of leaving to it his house at Lichfield ;
but his friends who were about him very properly dis-
suaded him from it, and he bequeathed it to some poor
relations. He took a pleasure in boasting of the many
eminent men who had been educated at Pembroke.
In this list are found the names of Mr. Hawkins
the Poetry Professor, Mr. Shenstone, Sir William
Blacks tone, and others ; not forgetting the celebrated
popular preacher, Mr. George Whitefield, of whom,
though Dr. Johnson did not think very highly, it must
be acknowledged that his eloquence was powerful,
his views pious and charitable, his assiduity almost
incredible ; and, that since his death, the integrity of
his character has been fully vindicated. Being himself
a poet, Johnson was peculiarly happy in mentioning
how many of the sons of Pembroke were poets ; adding,
with a smile of sportive triumph, ' Sir, we are a nest
of singing birds.'

Life of Johnson

307 I'he Doctor has a Frolic

ONE night when Beauclerk and Langton had
supped at a tavern in London, and sat till about
three in the morning, it came into their heads to
go and knock up Johnson, and see if they could prevail
on him to join them in a ramble. They rapped
violently at the door of his chambers in the Temple,
till at last he appeared in his shirt, with his little black
wig on the top of his head, instead of a nightcap, and
a poker in his hand, imagining, probably, that some
ruffians were coming to attack him. When he dis-
493



JAMES BOS WELL

covered who they were, and was told their errand, he
smiled, and with great good humour agreed to their
proposal : ' What, is it you, you dogs ! I'll have
a frisk with you.' He was soon dressed, and they
sallied forth together into Covent-Garden, where the
green-grocers and fruiterers were beginning to arrange
their hampers, just come in from the country. Johnson
made some attempts to help them ; but the honest
gardeners stared so at his figure and manner, and odd
interference, that he soon saw his services were not
relished. They then repaired to one of the neigh-
bouring taverns, and made a bowl of that liquor called
Bishop, which Johnson had always liked ; while in
joyous contempt of sleep, from which he had been
roused, he repeated the festive lines,

Short, short then be thy reign,
And give us to the world again !

They did not stay long, but walked down to the
Thames, took a boat, and rowed to Billingsgate.
Beauclerk and Johnson were so well pleased with their
amusement, that they resolved to persevere in dissipa-
tion for the rest of the day : but Langton deserted
them, being engaged to breakfast with some young
ladies. Johnson scolded him for ' leaving his social
friends, to go and sit with a set of wretched un-tdea'd
girls '. Garrick being told of this ramble, said to him
smartly, ' I heard of your frolick t'other night. You'll
be in the Chronicle.' Upon which Johnson afterwards
observed, ' He durst not do such a thing. His wife
would not let him ! '

Life of Johnson



493



JAMES BOSWELL



308 First ^Meeting with Johtison

MR. THOMAS DAVIES the actor, who then
kept a bookseller's shop in Russel - Street,
Covent-Garden, told me that Johnson was very much
his friend, and came frequently to his house, where
he more than once invited me to meet him ; but by
some unlucky accident or other he was prevented
from coming to us.

Mr. Thomas Davies was a man of good under-
standing and talents, with the advantage of a liberal
education. Though somewhat pompous, he was an
entertaining companion ; and his literary perform-
ances have no inconsiderable share of merit. He was
a friendly and very hospitable man. Both he and his
wife (who has been celebrated for her beauty), though
upon the stage for many years, maintained an uniform
decency of character ; and Johnson esteemed them,
and lived in as easy an intimacy with them, as with any
family which he used to visit. Mr. Davies recollected
several of Johnson's remarkable sayings, and was one
of the best of the many imitators of his voice and
manner, while relating them. He increased my
impatience more and more to see the extraordinary
man whose works I highly valued, and whose con-
versation was reported to be so peculiarly excellent.

At last, on Monday the 16th of May, when I was
sitting in Mr. Davies's back parlour, after having
drunk tea with him and Mrs. Davies, Johnson unex-
pectedly came into the shop ; and Mr. Davies having
perceived him through the glass-door in the room in
which we were sitting, advancing towards us, — he
announced his aweful approach to me, somewhat in
the manner of an actor in the part of Horatio, when

494



JAMES BOSWELL

he addresses Hamlet on the appearance of his father's
ghost, ' Look, my Lord, it comes.' I found that
I had a very perfect idea of Johnson's figure, from the
portrait of him painted by Sir Joshua Reynolds soon
after he had published his Dictionary, in the attitude
of sitting in his easy chair in deep meditation, which
was the first picture his friend did for him, which
Sir Joshua has very kindly presented to me, and from
which an engraving has been made for this work.
Mr. Davies mentioned my name, and respectfully
introduced me to him. I was much agitated ; and
recollecting his prejudice against the Scotch, of which
I had heard much, I said to Davies, ' Don't tell where
I come from.' — ' From Scotland,' cried Davies
roguishly. ' Mr. Johnson (said I), I do indeed come
from Scotland, but I cannot help it.' I am willing
to flatter myself that I meant this as light pleasantry
to soothe and conciliate him, and not as an humiliating
abasement at the expence of my country. But however
that might be, this speech was somewhat unlucky ;
for with that quickness of wit for which he was so
remarkable, he seized the expression ' come from
Scotland ', which I used in the sense of being of that
country ; and, as if I had said that I had come away
from it, or left it, retorted, ' That, Sir, I find, is what
a very great many of your countrymen cannot help.'
This stroke stunned me a good deal ; and when we
had sat down, I felt myself not a little embarrassed,
and apprehensive of what might come next. He then
addressed himself to Davies : ' What do you think of
Garrick? He has refused me an order for the play
for Miss Williams, because he knows the house will
be full, and that an order would be worth three
shillings.' Eager to take any opening to get into

495



JAMES BOSWELL

conversation with him, I ventured to say, ' O, Sir,
I cannot think Mr. Garrick would grudge such a trifle
to you.' ' Sir (said he with a stern look), I have
known David Garrick longer than you have done :
and I know no right you have to talk to me on the
subject.' Perhaps I deserved this check ; for it was
rather presumptuous in me, an entire stranger, to
express any doubt of the justice of his animadversion
upon his old acquaintance and pupil. I now felt
myself much mortified, and began to think that the
hope which I had long indulged of obtaining his
acquaintance was blasted. And, in truth, had not my
ardour been uncommonly strong, and my resolution
uncommonly persevering, so rough a reception might
have deterred me for ever from making any further
attempts. Fortunately, however, I remained upon the
field not wholly discomfited ; and was soon rewarded
by hearing some of his conversation, of which I pre-
served the following short minute, without marking the
questions and observations by which it was produced.

' People (he remarked) may be taken in once, who
imagine that an author is greater in private life than
other men. Uncommon parts require uncommon
opportunities for their exertion.

' In barbarous society, superiority of parts is of real
consequence. Great strength or great wisdom is of
much value to an individual. But in more polished
times there are people to do everything for money ;
and then there are a number of other superiorities,
such as those of birth and fortune, and rank, that
dissipate men's attention, and leave no extraordinary
share of respect for personal and intellectual superiority.
This is wisely ordered by Providence, to preserve some
equality among mankind.'
496



JAMES BOS WELL

' Sir, this book (' The Elements of Criticism which
he had taken up) is a pretty essay, and deserves to be
heldin someestimation,thoughmuchof it is chimerical.'

Speaking of one who with more than ordinary
boldness attacked public measures and the royal family,
he said, ' I think he is safe from the law, but he is an
abusive scoundrel ; and instead of applying to my Lord
Chief Justice to punish him, I would send half a dozen
footmen and have him well ducked.'

' The notion of liberty amuses the people of England,
and helps to keep off the taedium vitae. When a
butcher tells you that his heart bleeds for his country,
he has, in fact, no uneasy feeling.' . . .

I was highly pleased with the extraordinary vigour
of his conversation, and regretted that I was drawn
away from it by an engagement at another place.
I had, for a part of the evening, been left alone with
him, and had ventured to make an observation now
and then, which he received very civilly ; so that
I was satisfied that though there was a roughness in
his manner, there was no ill-nature in his disposition.
Davies followed me to the door, and when I complained
to him a little of the hard blows which the great
man had given me, he kindly took upon him to console
me by saying, ' Don't be uneasy. I can see he likes
you very well.'

Life of Johnson

'JUNIUS'

?Sir Philip Francis 1740-1818

309 To the Duke of Qrafton

IF I were personally your enemy, I might pity and
forgive you. You have every claim to compassion,
that can arise from misery and distress. The condition

497



' JUNIUS '

you are reduced to would disarm a private enemy of
his resentment, and leave no consolation to the most
vindictive spirit, but that such an object, as you are,
would disgrace the dignity of revenge. But in the
relation you have borne to this country, you have no
title to indulgence ; and if I had followed the dictates
of my own opinion, I never should have allowed you
the respite of a moment. In your public character,
you have injured every subject of the empire ; and
though an individual is not authorised to forgive the
injuries done to society, he is called upon to assert
his separate share in the public resentment. I sub-
mitted however to the judgment of men, more
moderate, perhaps more candid than myself. For my
own part, I do not pretend to understand those
prudent forms of decorum, those gentle rules of
discretion, which some men endeavour to unite with
the conduct of the greatest and most hazardous affairs.
Engaged in the defence of an honourable cause. I
would take a decisive part. — I should scorn to provide
for a future retreat, or to keep terms with a man,
who preserves no measures with the public. Neither
the abject submission of deserting his post in the hour
of danger, nor even the sacred shield of cowardice
should protect him. I would pursue him through
life, and try the last exertion of my abilities to preserve
the perishable infamy of his name, and make it
immortal.

The Letters of Junius



49S



WILLIAM PALEY

1743-1805

310 Ingratitude jor Qommon 'Benefits

ONE great cause of our insensibility to the goodness
of the Creator is the very extensiveness of his
bounty. We prize but little, what we share only in
common with the rest, or with the generality, of our
species. When we hear of blessings, we think forthwith
of successes, of prosperous fortunes, of honors, riches,
preferments, i. e. of those advantages and superiorities
over others, which we happen either to possess, or to
be in pursuit of, or to covet. The common benefits
of our nature entirely escape us. Yet these are the
great things. These constitute, what most properly
ought to be accounted blessings of Providence ; what
alone, if we might so speak, are worthy of its care.
Nightly rest and daily bread, the ordinary use of our
limbs, and senses, and understandings, are gifts which
admit of no comparison with any other. Yet, because
almost every man wc meet with possesses these, we
leave them out of our enumeration. They raise no
sentiment : they move no gratitude. Now, herein,
is our judgement perverted by our selfishness. A
blessing ought in truth to be the more satisfactory,
the bounty at least of the donor is rendered more
conspicuous, by its very diffusion, its commonness,
its cheapness ; by its falling to the lot, and forming
the happiness, of the great bulk and body of our
species, as well as of ourselves. Nay even when we
do not possess it, it ought to be matter of thankfulness
that others do.

Natural Theoloiy



499



THOMAS HOLCROFT

1745-1809

311 Life in a Racing-Stable

ALL the boys in the stable rise at the same hour,
X\. from half-past two in spring, to between four
and five in the depth of winter. The horses hear them
when they awaken each other, and neigh, to denote
their eagerness to be fed. Being dressed, the boy
begins with carefully clearing out the manger, and
giving a feed of oats, which he is obliged no less care-
fully to sift. He then proceeds to dress the litter ;
that is, to shake the bed on which the horse has been
lying, remove whatever is wet or unclean, and keep
the remaining straw in the stable for another time.
The whole stables are then thoroughly swept, the few
places for fresh air are kept open, the great heat of the
stable gradually cooled, and the horse, having ended
his first feed, is roughly cleaned and dressed. In about
half an hour after they begin, or a little better, the
horses have been rubbed down, and reclothed, saddled,
each turned in his stall, then bridled, mounted, and
the whole string goes out to morning exercise ; he
that leads being the first : for each boy knows his place.

Except by accident, the race-horse never trots.
He must either walk or gallop ; and in exercise, even
when it is the hardest, the gallop begins slowly and
gradually, and increases till the horse is nearly at full
speed. When he has galloped half a mile, the boy
begins to push him forward, without relaxation, for
another half-mile. This is at the period when the
horses are in full exercise, to which they come by
degrees. The boy that can best regulate these degrees
among those of light weight, is generally chosen to
500



THOMAS HOLCROFT



lead the gallop ; that is, he goes first out of the stable,
and first returns. . .

The morning's exercise often extends to four hours,
and the evening's to much about the same time.
Being once in the stable, each lad begins his labour.
He leads the horse into his stall, ties him up, rubs
down his legs with straw, takes off his saddle and body
clothes ; curries him carefully, then with both curry-
comb and brush, never leaves him till he has thoroughly
cleaned his skin, so that neither spot nor wet, nor any
appearance of neglect may be seen about him. The
horse is then reclothed, and suffered to repose for some
time, which is first employed in gratifying his hunger,
and recovering from bis weariness. All this is per-
formed, and the stables are once more shut up, about
nine o'clock.

Accustomed to this life, the boys are very little
overcome by fatigue, except that early in the morning
they may be drowsy. I have sometimes fallen slightly
asleep at the beginning of the first brushing gallop
But if they are not weary, they are hungry, and they
make themselves ample amends for all they have done.
Nothing perhaps can exceed the enjoyment of a stable-
boy's breakfast : what then may not be said of mine,
who had so long been used to suffer hunger, and so
seldom found the means of satisfying it ? Our break-
fast consisted of new milk, or milk porridge, then the
cold meat of the preceding day, most exquisite
Gloucester cheese, fine white bread, and concluded
with plentiful draughts of table beer. All this did
not overload the stomach, or in the least deprive me
of my youthful activity, except that like others I
might sometimes take a nap for an hour, after so small
a portion of sleep.

5°i



THOMAS HOLCROFT



For my own part, so total and striking was the change
which had taken place in my situation, that I could
not but feel it very sensibly. I was more conscious
of it than most boys would have been, and therefore
not a little satisfied. The former part of my life had
most of it been spent in turmoil, and often in singular
wretchedness. I had been exposed to every want, every
weariness, and every occasion of despondency, except
that such poor sufferers become reconciled to, and
almost insensible of suffering, and boyhood and
beggary are fortunately not prone to despond. Happy
had been the meal where I bad enough ; rich to me
was the rag that kept me warm ; and heavenly the
pillow, no matter what, or how hard, on which I could
lay my head to sleep.

Memoirs, written by Himself

PAUL JONES

(John Pai.l) i 747-1 792

312 ZhQzval Strategy

IN my judgment, there has never been an occasion
in all the naval wars between France and England
when the opportunity was so distinctly and so over-
whelmingly on the side of France as in those few
October days in 1781, off the Capes of the Chesapeake
— when France actually had, for the moment, com-
mand of the sea.

Now, my dear Kersaint, you know me too well to
accuse me of self-vaunting. You will not consider
me vain, in view of your knowledge of what happened
in the past off Carrickfergus, off Old Flamboro' Head,
and off the Liman in the Black Sea, if I say that, had
I stood — fortunately or unfortunately — in the shoes
502



PAUL JONES

of de Grasse, there would have been disaster to some
one off the Capes of the Chesapeake ; disaster of more
lasting significance than an orderly retreat of a beaten
fleet to a safe port. To put it a little more strongly,
there was a moment when the chance to destroy the
enemy's fleet would have driven from me all thought
of the conjoint strategy of the campaign as a whole.
I could not have helped it.

And I have never since ceased to mourn the failure
of the Count de Grasse to be as imprudent as I could
not have helped being on that grandest of all occasions.

Howbeit, as I have already said, the object of grand
strategy in that operation was accomplished by the
manoeuvring of the Count de Grasse without general
action-in-line. But I confess that under similar condi-
tions the temptation to destroy as well as repulse the
fleet of the enemy would have been resistless, had I
been the commander. It would have cost more men
and perhaps a ship or two ; but, in my opinion, success
in naval warfare is measured more perfectly by the
extent to which you can capture or sink the ships and
kill the seamen of the enemy than by the promptness
with which you can force him, by skilful manoeuvre
or distant cannonade, to sheer off and thereby, with
your consent, avoid a conflict that could hardly result
otherwise than in conquest for you and destruction
to him.

You will by no means infer from these cursory
observations that I fail to appreciate, within my
limited capacity, the grandeur of the tactical combina-
tions, the skill of the intricate manoeuvres, and the
far-sighted, long thought-out demonstrations by
which the Count de Toulouse drove Rooke out of
the Mediterranean in August, 1704, with no 'more ado

5<>3



PAUL JONES



than the comparatively bloodless battle off Malaga ;
or the address with which La Galissoniere repulsed
Byng from Minorca in 1756 by a long-range battle of
which the only notable casualty was the subsequent
execution of Byng by his own Government for the
alleged crime of failing to destroy the fleet opposed
to him ! or the brilliant campaign of my noble friend,
the Count D'Orvilliers, off Ushant in July, 1778, when
he forced Keppel to retreat ignominiously to England ;
not by stress of defeat, but by the cunningly planned
and adroitly executed expedient of avoiding, on any
terms but his own, the battle which Keppel vainly
tried to force upon him. Let me assure you that none
of these great events has been lost upon my sense of
admiration.

And yet, my dear Kersaint, one reflection persecutes
me, to mar all my memories and baffle all my admira-
tion. This is the undeniable fact that the English
ships and English sailors whom La Galissoniere
manoeuvred away from Minorca, under Byng, in 1756,
remained intact and lived to ruin Conflans in Quiberon
Bay three years later under Sir Edward Hawke ; and
that theships and the seamen of Graves, whom de Grasse
permitted to escape from his clutches off the Capes
of the Chesapeake in October, 1 78 1, were left intact,
and lived to discomfit de Grasse himself off Santa
Lucia and Dominica in April, 1782, under Rodney.

You know, of course, my dear Kersaint, that my
own opportunities in naval warfare have been but few
and feeble in comparison with such as I have men-
tioned. But I do not doubt your ready agreement
with me if I say that the hostile ships and commanders
that I have thus far enjoyed the opportunity of meeting
did not give any one much trouble thereafter. True,
S°4



PAUL JONES

this has been on a small scale ; but that was no fault
of mine. I did my best with the weapons given to
me. The rules of conduct, the maxims of action, and
the tactical instincts that serve to gain small victories
may always be expanded into the winning of great
ones with suitable opportunity ; because in human
affairs the sources of success are ever to be found in
the fountains of quick resolve and swift stroke ; and
it seems to be a law inflexible and inexorable that he
who will not risk cannot win.

Letter to Vtce-Admtral the Comte de Kersatnt, 1791



FANNY BURNEY

1752-1840

313 The Holborn 'Beau

I COULD almost have laughed when I looked at
Mr. Smith, who no sooner saw me addressed by
Sir Clement, than, retreating aloof from the company,
he seemed to lose at once all his happy self-sufficiency
and conceit : looking now at the baronet, now at
himself ; surveying, with sorrowful eyes, his dress,
struck with his air, his gestures, his easy gaiety; he
gazed at him with envious admiration, and seemed
himself, with conscious inferiority, to shrink into
nothing.

Observing that Sir Clement seemed disposed to
renew his enquiries, I turned towards one of the
paintings, and, pretending to be very much occupied
in looking at it, asked M. Du Bois some questions
concerning the figures.

' O ! Mon Dieu ! ' cried Madame Duval, ' don't
ask him ; your best way is to ask Mr. Smith, for he 's

S°5



FANNY BURNEY



been here the oftenest. Come, Mr Smith, I dare say
you can tell us all about them.'

' Why, yes, Ma'am, yes,' said Mr. Smith : who,
brightening up at this application, advanced towards
us with an air of assumed importance, which, however,
sat very uneasily upon him, and begged to know what
he should explain first : ' For I have attended,' said
he, ' to all these paintings, and know every thing in
them perfectly well ; for I am rather fond of pictures,
Ma'am ; and, really, I must say, I think a pretty picture
is a — a very — is really a very — is something very
pretty — '

' So do I too,' said Madame Duval ; ' but pray now,
Sir, tell us who that is meant for,' pointing to a figure
of Neptune.

' That ! — why, that, Ma'am, is, — Lord bless me,
I can't think how I come to be so stupid, but really
I have forgot his name ; — and yet, I know it as well
as my own too : — however, he 's a General, Ma'am,
they are all Generals.'

I saw Sir Clement bite his lips ; and, indeed, so
did I mine.

' Well,' said Madame Duval, ' it 's the oddest dress
for a General ever I see ! '

' He seems so capital a figure,' said Sir Clement, to
Mr. Smith, ' that I imagine he must be Generalissimo
of the whole army.'

' Yes, Sir, yes,' answered Mr. Smith, respectfully
bowing, and highly delighted at being thus referred to,
' you are perfectly right ; — but I cannot for my life
think of his name ; — perhaps, Sir, you may remember
it?'

' No, really,' replied Sir Clement, ' my acquaintance
among the Generals is not so extensive.'
506



FANNY BURNEY



The ironical tone of voice in which Sir Clement
spoke entirely disconcerted Mr. Smith ; who again
retiring to an humble distance, seemed sensibly
mortified at the failure of his attempt to recover his
consequence.

Evelina

314 Impeachment of Hastings

HIS [Burke's] opening had struck me with the highest
admiration of his powers, from the eloquence,
the imagination, the fire, the diversity of expression,
and the ready flow of language, with which he seemed
gifted, in a most superior manner, for any and every
purpose to which rhetoric could lead. ' And when he
came to his two narratives,' I continued, ' when he
related the particulars of those dreadful murders, he
interested, he engaged, he at last overpowered me ;
I felt my cause lost. I could hardly keep my seat.
My eyes dreaded a single glance towards a man so
accused as Mr. Hastings ; I wanted to sink on the floor,
that they might be saved so painful a sight. I had no
hope he could clear himself ; not another wish in
his favour remained. But when from this narration
Mr. Burke proceeded to his own comments and
declamation — when the charges of rapacity, cruelty,
tyranny were general, and made with all the violence
of personal detestation, and continued and aggravated
without any further fact or illustration ; then there
appeared more of study than of truth, more of invec-
tive than of justice ; and, in short, so little of proof
to so much of passion, that in a very short time I began
to lift up my head, my seat was no longer uneasy,
my eyes were indifferent which way they looked, or

5°7



FANNY BURNEY



what object caught them ; and before I was myself
aware of the declension of Mr. Burke's powers over
my feelings, I found myself a mere spectator in a
public place, and looking all around it, with my
opera-glass in my hand ! ' Diary

GEORGE CRABBE

1754-1832

7x5 iA Letter to 'Burke

[178!]

SIR, — I am sensible that I need even your talents
to apologize for the freedom I now take ; but
I have a plea which, however simply urged, will, with
a mind like yours, Sir, procure me pardon : I am one
of those outcasts on the world who are without a
friend, without employment, and without bread.

Pardon me a short preface. I had a partial father,
who gave me a better education than his broken
fortune would have allowed ; and a better than was
necessary, as he could give me that only. I was
designed for the profession of physic ; but not having
wherewithal to complete the requisite studies, the
design but served to convince me of a parent's affection,
and the error it had occasioned. In April last, I came
to London, with three pounds, and flattered myself
this would be sufficient to supply me with the common
necessaries of life, till my abilities should procure me
more ; of these I had the highest opinion, and a
poetical vanity contributed to my delusion. I knew
little of the world, and had read boob only : I wrote,
and fancied perfection in my compositions ; when
I wanted bread they promised me affluence, and
soothed me with dreams of reputation, whilst my
appearance subjected me to contempt.
5°8



GEORGE CRABBE



Time, reflection, and want, have shown me my
mistake. I see my trifles in that which I think the true
light ; and whilst I deem them such, have yet the
opinion that holds them superior to the common
run of poetical publications. . . .

Can you, Sir, in any degree, aid me with propriety ?
Will you ask any demonstrations of my veracity? I
have imposed upon myself, but I have been guilty
of no other imposition. Let me, if possible, interest
your compassion. I know those of rank and fortune
are teased with frequent petitions, and are compelled
to refuse the requests even of those whom they know
to be in distress ; it is, therefore, with a distant hope
I ventured to solicit such favour ; but you will forgive
me, Sir, if you do not think proper to relieve. It is
impossible that sentiments like yours can proceed from
any but a humane and generous heart.

I will call upon you, Sir, to-morrow, and if I have
not the happiness to obtain credit with you, I must
submit to my fate. My existence is a pain to myself,
and every one near and dear to me are distressed in
my distresses G. Crabbe.

WILLIAM COBBETT

1762-1835

316 The Sandpit

IN quitting Tilford we came on to the land belonging
to Waverly Abbey, and then, instead of going on
to the town of Farnham, veered away to the left
towards Wrecklesham, in order to cross the Farnham
and Alton turnpike-road, and to come on by the side
of Crondall to Odiham. We went a little out of the
way to go to a place called the Bourn, which lies in

5°9



WILLIAM COBBETT



the heath at about a mile from Farnham. It is
a winding narrow valley, down which, during the wet
season of the year, there runs a stream beginning at
the Holt Forest, and emptying itself into the Wey just
below Moor-Park, which was the seat of Sir W ilham
Temple when Swift was residing with him. We went
to this Bourn in order that I might show my son the
spot where I received the rudiments of my education.
There is a little hop-garden in which I used to work
when from eight to ten years old ; from which I have
scores of times run to follow the hounds, leaving the
hoe to do the best that it could to destroy the weeds ;
but the most interesting thing was a sand-hill, which
goes from a part of the heath down to the rivulet.
As a due mixture of pleasure with toil, I, with two
brothers, used occasionally to disport ourselves, as the
lawyers call it, at this sand-hill. Our diversion was
this : we used to go to the top of the hill, which was
steeper than the roof of a house ; one used to draw
his arms out of the sleeves of his smock-frock, and lay
himself down with his arms by his sides ; and then
the others, one at head, and the other at feet, sent
him rolling down the hill like a barrel or a log of wood.
By the time he got to the bottom, his hair, eyes, ears,
nose, and mouth, were all full of this loose sand ; then
the others took their turn, and at every roll, there
was a monstrous spell of laughter. I had often told
my sons of this while they were very little, and I now
took one of them to see the spot. But, that was not
all. This was the spot where I was receiving my
education ; and this was the sort of education ; and
I am perfectly satisfied that if I had not received such
an education, or something very much like it ; that,
if I had been brought up a milksop, with a nursery-

5i°



WILLIAM COBBETT



maid everlastingly at my heels, I should have been
at this day as great a fool, as inefficient a mortal, as
any of those frivolous idiots that are turned out from
Winchester and Westminster School, or from any of
those dens of dunces called Colleges and Universities.
It is impossible to say how much I owe to that sand-
hill ; and I went to return it my thanks for the
ability which it probably gave me to be one of the
greatest terrors, to one of the greatest and most
powerful bodies of knaves and fools, that ever were
permitted to afflict this or any other country.

Rural Rides

JOHN NYREN

1764-1837

3/7 Tom Walker

AND now for those anointed clod-stumpers, the
il Walkers, Tom and Harry. Never sure came
two such unadulterated rustics into a civilized com-
munity. How strongly are the figures of the men (of
Tom's in particular) brought to my mind when they
first presented themselves to the club upon Windmill-
down. Tom's hard, ungain, scrag-of-mutton frame ;
wilted, apple-john face (he always looked twenty
years older than he really was), his long spider legs,
as thick at the ankles as at the hips, and perfectly
straight all the way down — for the embellishment of
a calf in Tom's leg Dame Nature had considered
would be but a wanton superfluity. Tom was the
driest and most rigid-limbed chap I ever knew ; his
skin was like the rind of an old oak, and as sapless.
I have seen his knuckles handsomely knocked about
from Harris's bowling ; but never saw any blood

si 1



JOHN NYREN

upon his hands — you might just as well attempt to
phlebotomize a mummy. This rigidity of muscle
(or rather I should say of tendon, for muscle was
another ingredient economized in the process of Tom's
configuration) — this rigidity, I say, was carried into
every motion. He moved like the rude machinery
of a steam-engine in the infancy of construction,
and when he ran, every member seemed ready to fly
to the four winds. He toiled like a tar on horseback.
The uncouth actions of these men furnished us, who
prided ourselves upon a certain grace in movement
and finished air, with an everlasting fund of amusement,
and for some time they took no great fancy to me,
because I used to worry, and tell them they could not
play. They were, however, good hands when they first
came among us, and had evidently received most
excellent instruction ; but after they had derived the
advantage of first-rate practice, they became most
admirable batters, and were the trustiest fellows
(particularly Tom) in cases of emergency or difficulty.
They were devilish troublesome customers to get out.
I have very frequently known Tom to go in first, and
remain to the very last man. He was the coolest, the
most imperturbable fellow in existence : it used to
be said of him that he had no nerves at all. Whether
he was only practising, or whether he knew that the
game was in a critical state, and that much depended
upon his play, he was the same phlegmatic, unmoved
man — he was the Washington of cricketers. Neither
he nor his brother were active, yet both were effective
fieldsmen. Upon one occasion, on the Mary-le-bone
grounds, I remember Tom going in first, and Lord
Frederick Beauclerc giving him the first four balls,
all of an excellent length. First four or last four made
512



JOHN NYREN

no difference to Tom — he was always the same cool,
collected fellow. Every ball he dropped down just
before his bat. Off went his lordship's white hat —
dash upon the ground (his constant action when
disappointed) — calling him at the same time ' a con-
founded old beast '. — ' I doan't care what ee zays,'
said Tom, when one close by asked if he had heard
Lord Frederick call him ' an old beast '. No, no ;
Tom was not the man to be flustered.

Young Cricketer's Tutor



ARTHUR WELLESLEY,
DUKE OF WELLINGTON

1769-1852

318 Qhaplains Jor the zArmy

I BELIEVE that you have attended a good deal to
the establishment of the chaplains to the army,
upon which I am now about to trouble you.

Notwithstanding all that has been done upon the
subject, with a view to making their situation such
as to induce respectable persons to accept of them,
I fear that they are not yet sufficiently advantageous
to insure the object. I believe the income, while they
are employed abroad, to be sufficiently good, but that
of retired chaplains, after service, is not ; and the
period of service required of them is too long.

You will observe that a man can scarcely be eligible
to be an army chaplain till he is six or eight and
twenty, after an expensive education ; and it can
scarcely be said that the pay of a retired chaplain,
at thirty-six years of age, is what a respectable person
2830 s 513



ARTHUR WELLESLEY



would have acquired if he had followed any other line
of the clerical profession besides the army. . .

I am very anxious upon this subject, not only from
the desire which every man must have that so many
persons as there are in this army should have the
advantage of religious instruction, but from a know-
ledge that it is the greatest support and aid to military
discipline and order.

It has, besides, come to my knowledge that
Methodism is spreading very fast in the army. There
are two, if not three, Methodist meetings in this
town, of which one is in the Guards. The men meet
in the evening, and sing psalms ; and I believe a
sergeant (Stephens) now and then gives them a
sermon. Mr. Briscall has his eye upon these transac-
tions, and would give me notice were they growing
into anything which ought to be put a stop to ; and
the respectability of his character and conduct has
given him an influence over these people which will
prevent them from going wrong.

These meetings likewise prevail in other parts of
the army. In the 9th Regiment there is one, at which

two officers attend, Lieutenant and Dr. ;

and the commanding officer of the regiment has not
yet been able to prevail upon them to discontinue this
practice. Here, and in similar circumstances, we want
the assistance of a respectable clergyman. By his
personal influence and advice, and by that of true
religion, he would moderate the zeal and enthusiasm
of these gentlemen, and would prevent their meetings
from being mischievous, if he did not prevail upon
them to discontinue them entirely.

This is the only mode in which, in my opinion, we
can touch these meetings. The meeting of soldiers in
5i4



DUKE OF WELLINGTON



their cantonments to sing psalms or hear a sermon read
by one of their comrades is, in the abstract, perfectly
innocent, and it is a better way of spending their time
than many others to which they are addicted ; but
it may become otherwise, and yet, till the abuse has
made some progress, the commanding officer would
have no knowledge of it, nor could he interfere.
Even at last his interference must be guided by dis-
cretion, otherwise he will do more harm than good ;
and it can in no case be so effectual as that of a
respectable clergyman.

I wish, therefore, you would turn your mind a little
more to this subject, and arrange some plan by which
the number of respectable and efficient clergymen
with the army may be increased.

Dispatches

WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

1770-1850

319 Sinews of ^Patriotism

i

1 TF my Neighbour fails,' says the true Patriot, ' more
JL devolves upon me.' Discord and even treason are
not, in a country situated as Spain is, the pure evils
which, upon a superficial view, they appear to be.
Never are a people so livelily admonished of the love
they bear their country, and of the pride which they
have in their common parent, as when they hear of
some parricidal attempt of a false brother. For this
cause chiefly, in times of national danger, are their
fancies so busy in suspicion ; which under such shape,
though oftentimes producing dire and pitiable effects,
is notwithstanding in its general character no other

5*5



WILLIAM WORDSWORTH



than that habit which has grown out of the instinct
of self-preservation — elevated into a wakeful and
affectionate apprehension for the whole, and ennobling
its private and baser ways by the generous use to which
they are converted. Nor ever has a good and loyal
man such a swell of mind, such a clear insight into the
constitution of virtue, and such a sublime sense of its
power, as at the first tidings of some atrocious act of
perfidy ; when, having taken the alarm for human
nature, a second thought recovers him ; and his faith
returns — gladsome from what has been revealed
within himself, and awful from participation of the
secrets in the profaner grove of humanity which that
momentary blast laid open to his view.

The Convention of Cintra

ii

WOE be to that country whose military power is
irresistible ! I deprecate such an event for
Great Britain scarcely less than for any other land.
Scipio foresaw the evils with which Rome would be
visited when no Carthage should be in existence for
her to contend with. If a nation have nothing to
oppose or to fear without, it cannot escape decay and
concussion within. Universal triumph and absolute
security soon betray a state into abandonment of that
discipline, civil and military, by which its victories
were secured. If the time should ever come when
this island shall have no more formidable enemies by
land than it has at this moment by sea, the extinction
of all that it previously contained of good and great
would soon follow. Indefinite progress, undoubtedly,
there ought to be somewhere ; but let that be in
knowledge, in science, in civilization, in the increase of
516



WILLIAM WORDSWORTH



the numbers of the people, and in the augmentation of
their virtue and happiness. But progress in conquest
cannot be indefinite ; and for that very reason, if for
no other, it cannot be a fit object for the exertions of
a people, I mean beyond certain limits, which, of
course, will vary with circumstances. My prayer, as
a patriot, is, that we may always have, somewhere or
other, enemies capable of resisting us, and keeping us
at arm's length.

Letter to Captain Pasley, 28 March 1811

320 The T'oet

TO this knowledge which all men carry about
with them, and to these sympathies in which,
without any other discipline than that of our daily
life, we are fitted to take delight, the Poet principally
directs his attention. He considers man and nature
as essentially adapted to each other, and the mind
of man as naturally the mirror of the fairest and most
interesting properties of nature. And thus the Poet,
prompted by this feeling of pleasure, which accom-
panies him through the whole course of his studies,
converses with general nature, with affections akin to
those, which, through labour and length of time, the
Man of Science has raised up in himself, by conversing
with those particular parts of nature which are the
objects of his studies. The knowledge both of the
Poet and the Man of Science is pleasure ; but the
knowledge of the one cleaves to us as a necessary part
of our existence, our natural and unalienable inherit-
ance ; the other is a personal and individual acquisition,
slow to come to us, and by no habitual and direct
sympathy connecting us with our fellow-beings. The
Man of Science seeks truth as a remote and unknown

517



WILLIAM WORDSWORTH



benefactor ; he cherishes and loves it in his solitude :
the Poet, singing a song in which all human beings
join with him, rejoices in the presence of truth as our
visible friend and hourly companion. Poetry is the
breath and finer spirit of all knowledge ; it is the
impassioned expression which is in the countenance
of all Science. Emphatically may it be said of the
Poet, as Shakespeare hath said of man, ' that he looks
before and after.' He is the rock of defence for human
nature ; an upholder and preserver, carrying every-
where with him relationship and love. In spite of
difference of soil and climate, of language and manners,
of laws and customs : in spite of things silently gone
out of mind, and things violently destroyed ; the Poet
binds together by passion and knowledge the vast
empire of human society, as it is spread over the whole
earth, and over all time. Preface to Lyrical Ballads

DOROTHY WORDSWORTH

1771-1855

321 i. The 'Beggars

AVERY tall woman, tall much beyond the measure
. of tall women, called at the door. She had on
a very long brown cloak and a very white cap, without
bonnet. Her face was excessively brown, but it had
plainly once been fair. She led a little bare-footed
child about two years old by the hand, and said her
husband, who was a tinker, was gone before with the
other children. I gave her a piece of bread. After-
wards on my way to Ambleside, beside the bridge at
Rydale, I saw her husband sitting by the roadside, his
two asses feeding beside him, and the two young
children at play upon the grass. The man did not beg.
I passed on and about a quarter of a mile further
518



DOROTHY WORDSWORTH

I saw two boys before me, one about 10, the other
about 8 years old, at play chasing a butterfly. They
were wild figures, not very ragged, but without
shoes and stockings. The hat of the elder was wreathed
round with yellow flowers, the younger, whose hat
was only a rimless crown, had stuck it round with
laurel leaves. They continued at play till I drew very
near, and then they addressed me with the begging
cant and the whining voice of sorrow. I said ' I served
your mother this morning.' (The boys were so like
the woman who had called at . . . that I could not be
mistaken.) ' O ! ' says the elder, ' you could not serve
my mother for she 's dead, and my father 's on at
the next town — he 's a potter.' I persisted in my
assertion, and that I would give them nothing. Says
the elder, ' Let's away,' and away they flew like
lightning. They had however sauntered so long in
their road that they did not reach Ambleside before
me, and I saw them go up to Matthew Harrison's
house with their wallet upon the elder's shoulder, and
creeping with a beggar's complaining foot. On my
return through Ambleside I met in the street the
mother driving her asses, in the two panniers of one
of which were the two little children, whom she wae
chiding and threatening with a wand which she used
to drive on her asses, while the little things hung in
wantonness over the pannier's edge.

it. Friday 14th £May 1802

AVERY cold morning — hail and snow showers all
day. We went to Brothers wood, intending to
get plants, and to go along the shore of the lake to the
foot. We did go a part of the way, but there was no
pleasure in stepping along that difficult sauntering road

CIO



DOROTHY WORDSWORTH

in this ungenial weather. We turned again, and walked
backwards and forwards in Brothers wood. William
tired himself with seeking an epithet for the cuckoo. I
sate a while upon my last summer seat, the mossy stone.
William's, unoccupied, beside me, and the space be-
tween, where Coleridge has so often lain. The oak trees
are just putting forth yellow knots of leaves. The ashes
with their flowers passing away, and leaves coming out ;
the blue hyacinth is not quite full blown ; gowans are
coming out ; marsh marigolds in full glory ; the little
star plant, a star without a flower. We took home a great
load of gowans, and planted them about the orchard.
After dinner I worked bread, then came and mended
stockings beside William ; he fell asleep. After tea
I walked to Rydale for letters. It was a strange night.
The hills were covered over with a slight covering of
hail or snow, just so as to give them a hoary winter look
with the black rocks. The woods looked miserable,
the coppices green as grass, which looked quite un-
natural, and they seemed half shrivelled up, as if they
shrank from the air. O, thought I i what a beautiful
thing God has made winter to be, by stripping the
trees, and letting us see their shapes and forms. What
a freedom does it seem to give to the storms ! There
were several new flowers out, but I had no pleasure
in looking at them. I walked as fast as I could back
again with my letter from S. H. . . . Met William at
the top of White Moss. . . . Near ten we came in.
William and Molly had dug the ground and planted
potatoes in my absence. We wrote to Coleridge ;
sent off bread and frocks to the C.'s. Went to bed
at half-past eleven. William very nervous. After he
was in bed, haunted with altering The Rainbow.

Journal

520



SIR WALTER SCOTT

1771-1832

522 *The Laird Evicts the Cjipsies

CERTAIN qualms of feeling had deterred Ellan-
gowan from attending in person to see his
tenants expelled. He left the executive part of the
business to the officers of the law. . .

Mr. Bertram himself chose that day to make a visit
to a friend at some distance. But it so happened,
notwithstanding his precautions, that he could not
avoid meeting his late tenants during their retreat
from his property.

It was in a hollow way, near the top of a steep
ascent, upon the verge of the Ellangowan estate, that
Mr. Bertram met the gipsy procession. Four or five
men formed the advanced guard, wrapped in long loose
great-coats that hid their tall slender figures, as the
large slouched hats, drawn over their brows, concealed
their wild features, dark eyes, and swarthy faces.
Two of them carried long fowling-pieces, one wore
a broadsword without a sheath, and all had the High-
land dirk, though they did not wear that weapon
openly or ostentatiously. Behind them followed the
train of laden asses, and small carts, or tumblers as they
were called in that country, on which were laid the
decrepit and the helpless, the aged and infant part of
the exiled community. The women in their red
cloaks and straw hats, the elder children with bare
heads and bare feet, and almost naked bodies, had the
immediate care of the little caravan. The road was
narrow, running between two broken banks of sand. . .

When the Laird had pressed on with difficulty
among a crowd of familiar faces, which had on all

5"



SIR WALTER SCOTT



former occasions marked his approach with the
reverence due to that of a superior being, but in which
he now only read hatred and contempt, and had got
clear of the throng, he could not help turning his
horse, and looking back to mark the progress of their
march. . .

The van had already reached a small and stunted
thicket, which was at the bottom of the hill, and which
gradually hid the line of march until the last stragglers
disappeared.

His sensations were bitter enough. The race, it
is true, which he had thus summarily dismissed from
their ancient place of refuge, was idle and vicious ;
but had he endeavoured to render them otherwise ?
They were not more irregular characters now, than
they had been while they were admitted to consider
themselves as a sort of subordinate dependants of
his family ; and ought the mere circumstance of his
becoming a magistrate to have made at once such
a change in his conduct towards them ? Some means
of reformation ought at least to have been tried, before
sending seven families at once upon the wide world,
and depriving them of a degree of countenance which
withheld them at least from atrocious guilt. There
was also a natural yearning of heart on parting with
so many known and familiar faces ; and to this feeling
Godfrey Bertram was peculiarly accessible, from the
limited qualities of his mind, which sought its principal
amusements among the petty objects around him. As
he was about to turn his horse's head to pursue his
journey, Meg Merrilies, who had lagged behind the
troop, unexpectedly presented herself.

She was standing upon one of those high precipitous
banks, which, as we before noticed, overhung the road ;
522



SIR WALTER SCOTT



so that she was placed considerably higher than
Ellangowan, even though he was on horseback ; and
her tall figure, relieved against the clear blue sky,
seemed almost of supernatural stature. We have
noticed that there was in her general attire, or rather
in her mode of adjusting it, somewhat of a foreign
costume, artfully adopted perhaps for the purpose of
adding to the effect of her spells and predictions, or
perhaps from some traditional notions respecting the
dress of her ancestors. On this occasion, she had
a large piece of red cotton cloth rolled about her head
in the form of a turban, from beneath which her dark
eyes flashed with uncommon lustre. Her long and
tangled black hair fell in elf-locks from the folds of
this singular head-gear. Her attitude was that of
a sibyl in frenzy, and she stretched out in her right
hand a sapling bough, which seemed just pulled.

' I'll be d d,' said the groom, ' if she has not

been cutting the young ashes in the Dukit park ! ' —
The Laird made no answer, but continued to look at
the figure which was thus perched above his path.

' Ride your ways,' said the gipsy, ' ride your ways,
Laird of Ellangowan — ride your ways, Godfrey Ber-
tram ! — This day have ye quenched seven smoking
hearths — see if the fire in your ain parlour burn the
blither for that. Ye have riven the thack off seven
cottar houses — look if your ain roof-tree stand the
faster. — Ye may stable your stirks in the shealings at
Derncleugh — see that the hare does not couch on
the hearthstane at Ellangowan. — Ride your ways,
Godfrey Bertram — what do ye glower after our folk
for f — There 's thirty hearts there, that wad hae
wanted bread ere ye had wanted sunkets, and spent
their life-blood ere ye had scratched your finger.

5*3



SIR WALTER SCOTT



Yes — there 's thirty yonder, from the auld wife of an
hundred to the babe that was born last week, that ye
have turned out o' their bits o' bields, to sleep with
the tod and the blackcock in the muirs ! — Ride your
ways, Ellangowan.' — Our bairns are hinging at our
weary backs — look that your braw cradle at hame be
the fairer spread up : not that I'm wishing ill to little
Harry, or to the babe that 's yet to be born — God
forbid — and make them kind to the poor, and better
folk than their father ! — And now, ride e'en your ways ;
for these are the last words ye'll ever hear Meg
Merrilies speak, and this is the last reise that I'll ever
cut in the bonny woods of Ellangowan.'

So saying, she broke the sapling she held in her
hand, and flung it into the road. Margaret of Anjou,
bestowing on her triumphant foes her keen-edged
malediction, could not have turned from them with
a gesture more proudly contemptuous. The Laird
was clearing his voice to speak, and thrusting his hand
in his pocket to find a half-crown ; the gipsy waited
neither for his reply nor his donation, but strode down
the hill to overtake the caravan.

Ellangowan rode pensively home ; and it was
remarkable that he did not mention this interview to
any of his family. The groom was not so reserved ;
he told the story at great length to a full audience
in the kitchen, and concluded by swearing, that ' if
ever the devil spoke by the mouth of a woman, he
had spoken by that of Meg Merrilies that blessed
day'.

Guy Mannertng



524



SIR WALTER SCOTT



323 The 'Phoca

' "OUT what is that yonder?' exclaimed Hector,
XJ interrupting himself.

' One of the herd of Proteus,' said the Antiquary —
' a phoca, or seal, lying asleep on the beach.'

Upon which M'Intyre, with the eagerness of a young
sportsman, totally forgot both Ossian, Patrick, his
uncle, and his wound, and exclaiming — ' I shall have
her ! I shall have her ! ' snatched the walking-stick
out of the hand of the astonished Antiquary, at some
risk of throwing him down, and set off at full speed to
get between the animal and the sea, to which element,
having caught the alarm, she was rapidly retreating.

Not Sancho, when his master interrupted his account
of the combatants of Pentapolin with the naked arm
to advance in person to the charge of the flock of
sheep, stood more confounded than Oldbuck at this
sudden escapade of his nephew.

' Is the devil in him,' was his first exclamation, ' to
go to disturb the brute that was never thinking of
him ! ' — Then elevating his voice, ' Hector — nephew —
fool — let alone the phoca — let alone the phoca ! — they
bite, I tell you, like furies. He minds me no more
than a post. There — there they are at it — Gad, the
phoca has the best of it ! I am glad to see it,' said he,
in the bitterness of his heart, though really alarmed for
his nephew's safety — * I am glad to see it, with all
my heart and spirit.'

In truth, the seal, finding her retreat intercepted
by the light-footed soldier, confronted him manfully,
and having sustained a heavy blow without injury,
she knitted her brows as is the fashion of the animal
when incensed, and making use at once of her fore-

525



SIR WALTER SCOTT



paws and her unwieldy strength, wrenched the weapon
out of the assailant's hand, overturned him on the
sands, and scuttled away into the sea, without doing
him any further injury. Captain M'Intyre, a good
deal out of countenance at the issue of his exploit,
just rose in time to receive the ironical congratulations
of his uncle upon a single combat worthy to be com-
memorated by Ossian himself, ' since,' said the
Antiquary, ' your magnanimous opponent hath fled,
though not upon eagle's wings, from the foe that was

low Egad, she walloped away with all the grace

of triumph, and has carried my stick off also, by way of
sfoha optma.'

M'Intyre had little to answer for himself, except
that a Highlander could never pass a deer, a seal, or
a salmon, where there was a possibility of having a trial
of skill with them, and that he had forgot one of his
arms was in a sling. He also made his fall an apology
for returning back to Monkbarns, and thus escaped
the further raillery of his uncle, as well as his lamenta-
tions for his walking-stick.

' I cut it,' he said, ' in the classic woods of Haw-
thornden, when I did not expect always to have been
a bachelor — I would not have given it for an ocean of
seals — O Hector ! Hector ! — thy namesake was born
to be the prop of Troy, and thou to be the plague of
Monkbarns ! '

The Antiquary

324 aA Lost Qause

AMID this scene of confusion, a gentleman, plainly
jTY. dressed in a riding-habit, with a black cockade
in his hat, but without any arms except a couteau-de~
526



SIR WALTER SCOTT



chasse, walked into the apartment without ceremony.
He was a tall, thin, gentlemanly man, with a look and
bearing decidedly military. He had passed through
their guards, if in the confusion they now maintained
any, without stop or question, and now stood, almost
unarmed, among armed men, who nevertheless gazed
on him as on the angel of destruction.

' You look coldly on me, gentlemen,' he said. ' Sir

Richard Glendale — my Lord , we were not always

such stiangers. Ha, Pate-in-Peril, how is it with you ?
and you, too, Ingoldsby — I must not call you by any
other name — why do you receive an old friend so
coldly ? But you guess my errand.'

' And are prepared for it, general,' said Redgauntlet ;
' we are not men to be penned up like sheep for the
slaughter.'

' Pshaw ! you take it too seriously — let me speak
but one word with you.'

' No words can shake our purpose,' said Redgauntlet,
4 were your whole command, as I suppose is the case,
drawn round the house.'

' I am certainly not unsupported,' said the general ;
' but if you would hear me '

' Hear me, sir,' said the Wanderer, stepping forward ;
' I suppose I am the mark you aim at — I surrender
myself willingly, to save these gentlemen's danger — let
this at least avail in their favour.'

An exclamation of ' Never, never ! ' broke from the
little body of partisans, who threw themselves round
the unfortunate prince, and would have seized or
struck down Campbell, had it not been that he re-
mained with his arms folded, and a look, rather indicat-
ing impatience because they would not hear him, than
the least apprehension of violence at their hand.

5=7



SIR WALTER SCOTT



At length he obtained a moment's silence. ' I do
not,' he said, ' know this gentleman ' — (making a
profound bow to the unfortunate prince) — ' I do not
wish to know him ; it is a knowledge which would suit
neither of us.'

' Our ancestors, nevertheless, have been well ac-
quainted,' said Charles, unable to suppress, even at
that hour of dread and danger, the painful recollections
of fallen royalty.

' In one word, General Campbell,' said Redgauntlet,
' is it to be peace or war f You are a man of honour,
and we can trust you.'

' I thank you, sir,' said the general ; ' and I reply,
that the answer to your question rests with yourself.
Come, do not be fools, gentlemen ; there was perhaps
no great harm meant or intended by your gathering
together in this obscure corner, for a bear-bait or
a cock-fight, or whatever other amusement you may
have intended, but it was a little imprudent, consider-
ing how you stand with government, and it has
occasioned some anxiety. Exaggerated accounts of
your purpose have been laid before government by
the information of a traitor in your own counsels ;
and I was sent down post to take the command of
a sufficient number of troops, in case these calumnies
should be found to have any real foundation. I have
come here, of course, sufficiently supported both with
cavalry and infantry, to do whatever might be neces-
sary ; but my commands are — and I am sure they
agree with my inclination — to make no arrests, nay,
to make no further inquiries of any kind, if this good
assembly will consider their own interest so far as to
give up their immediate purpose, and return quietly
home to their own houses.'
5*8



SIR WALTER SCOTT



' What ! — all ? ' exclaimed Sir Richard Glendale —
' all, without exception ? '

' All, without one single exception,' said the
general ; ' such are my orders. If you accept my terms,
say so, and make haste ; for things may happen to
interfere with his Majesty's kind purposes towards
you all.'

' His Majesty's kind purposes ! ' said the Wanderer.
' Do I hear you aright, sir ? '

' I speak the king's very words, from his very lips,'
replied the general. ' " I will," said his Majesty,
" deserve the confidence of my subjects by reposing
my security in the fidelity of the millions who acknow-
ledge my title — in the good sense and prudence of the
few who continue, from the errors of education, to
disown it." His Majesty will not even believe that
the most zealous Jacobites who yet remain can nourish
a thought of exciting a civil war, which must be fatal
to their families and themselves, besides spreading
bloodshed and ruin through a peaceful land. He
cannot even believe of his kinsman, that he would
engage brave and generous though mistaken men, in
an attempt which must ruin all who have escaped
former calamities ; and he is convinced, that, did
curiosity or any other motive lead that person to visit
this country, he would soon see it was his wisest course
to return to the continent ; and his Majesty com-
passionates his situation too much to offer any obstacle
to his doing so.'

' Is this real ? ' said Redgauntlet. ' Can you mean
this f Am I — are all, are any of these gentlemen at
liberty, without interruption, to embark in yonder
brig, which, I see, is now again approaching the shore f '

' You, sir — all — any of the gentlemen present,' said

5*9



SIR WALTER SCOTT



the general, — ' all whom the vessel can contain, are
at liberty to embark uninterrupted by me ; but
I advise none to go off who have not powerful reasons
unconnected with the present meeting, for this will
be remembered against no one.'

' Then, gentlemen,' said Redgauntlet, clasping his
hands together as the words burst from him, ' the
cause is lost for ever ! '

Redgauntlet

325 The Trial of Svan Dhu

' T^ERGUS MAC-IVOR of Glennaquoich, otherwise
JT called Vich Ian Vohr, and Evan Mac-Ivor, in
the Dhu of Tarrascleugh, otherwise called Evan Dhu,
otherwise called Evan Maccombich, or Evan Dhu
Maccombich — you, and each of you, stand attainted
of high treason. What have you to say for yourselves
why the Court should not pronounce judgement
against you, that you die according to law ? '

Fergus, as the presiding Judge was putting on the
fatal cap of judgement, placed his own bonnet upon
his head, regarded him with a steadfast and stern look,
and replied in a firm voice, ' I cannot let this numerous
audience suppose that to such an appeal I have no
answer to make. But what I have to say, you would
not bear to hear, for my defence would be your con-
demnation. Proceed, then, in the name of God,
to do what is permitted to you. Yesterday, and the
day before, you have condemned loyal and honourable
blood to be poured forth like water. Spare not mine.
Were that of all my ancestors in my veins, I would have
perilled it in this quarrel.' He resumed his seat, and
refused again to rise.

Evan Maccombich looked at him with great earnest-
53°



SIR WALTER SCOTT



ness, and, rising up, seemed anxious to speak ; but
the confusion of the court, and the perplexity arising
from thinking in a language different from that in
which he was to express himself, kept him silent.
There was a murmur of compassion among the specta-
tors, from an idea that the poor fellow intended to
plead the influence of his superior as an excuse for his
crime. The Judge commanded silence, and encouraged
Evan to proceed.

' I was only ganging to say, my lord,' said Evan, in
what he meant to be in an insinuating manner, ' that
if your excellent honour, and the honourable Court,
would let Vich Ian Vohr go free just this once, and
let him gae back to France, and no to trouble King
George's government again, that ony six o' the very
best of his clan will be willing to be justified in his
stead ; and if you'll just let me gae down to Glenna-
quoich, I'll fetch them up to ye mysell, to head or
hang, and you may begin wi' me the very first man.'

Notwithstanding the solemnity of the occasion,
a sort of laugh was heard in the court at the extraordin-
ary nature of the proposal. The Judge checked this
indecency, and Evan, looking sternly around, when
the murmur abated, ' If the Saxon gentlemen are
laughing,' he said, ' because a poor man, such as me,
thinks my life, or the life of six of my degree, is worth
that of Vich Ian Vohr, it 's like enough they may be
very right ; but if they laugh because they think
I would not keep my word, and come back to redeem
him, I can tell them they ken neither the heart of
a Hielandman, nor the honour of a gentleman.'

There was no further inclination to laugh among
the audience, and a dead silence ensued.

Waverley
S3i



SIR WALTER SCOTT



326 The 'Banner of England

THE king was soon at the foot of St. George's
Mount, the sides as well as platform of which were
now surrounded and crowded, partly by those belong-
ing to the Duke of Austria's retinue, who were cele-
brating, with shouts of jubilee, the act which they
considered as an assertion of national honour ; partly
by bystanders of different nations, whom dislike to
the English, or mere curiosity, had assembled together,
to witness the end of these extraordinary proceedings.
Through this disorderly troop Richard burst his way,
like a goodly ship under full sail, which cleaves her
forcible passage through the rolling billows, and heeds
not that they unite after her passage and roar upon
her stern. . .

' Who has dared,' he said, laying his hands upon the
Austrian standard, and speaking in a voice like the
sound which precedes an earthquake ; ' who has dared
to place this paltry rag beside the banner of England ? '

The archduke wanted not personal courage, and it
was impossible he could hear this question without
reply. Yet, so much was he troubled and surprised
by the unexpected arrival of Richard, and affected
by the general awe inspired by his ardent and unyield-
ing character, that the demand was twice repeated, in
a tone which seemed to challenge heaven and earth,
ere the archduke replied with such firmness as he could
command, ' It was I, Leopold of Austria.'

' Then shall Leopold of Austria,' replied Richard,
' presently see the rate at which his banner and his
pretensions are held by Richard of England.'

So saying, he pulled up the standard-spear, splintered
it to pieces, threw the banner itself on the ground, and
placed his foot upon it.
53»



SIR WALTER SCOTT



' Thus,' said he, ' I trample on the banner of Austria
— Is there a knight among your Teutonic chivalry, dare
impeach my deed ? '

There was a momentary silence ; but there are no
braver men than the Germans.

' I,' and ' I,' and ' I,' was heard from several knights
of the duke's followers ; and he himself added his
voice to those which accepted the King of England's
defiance.

' Why do we dally thus ? ' said the Earl Wallenrode,
a gigantic warrior from the frontiers of Hungary :
' Brethren, and noble gentlemen, this man's foot is
on the honour of your country — Let us rescue it from
violation, and down with the pride of England ! '

So saying, he drew his sword, and struck at the king
a blow which might have proved fatal, had not the
Scot intercepted and caught it upon his shield.

' I have sworn,' said King Richard — and his voice
was heard above all the tumult, which now waxed
wild and loud — ' never to strike one whose shoulder
bears the cross ; therefore live, Wallenrode — but live
to remember Richard of England.'

As he spoke, he grasped the tall Hungarian round the
waist, and, unmatched in wrestling as in other military
exercises, hurled him backwards with such violence
that the mass flew as if discharged from a military
engine, not only through the ring of spectators who
witnessed the extraordinary scene, but over the edge
of the mount itself, down the steep side of which
Wallenrode rolled headlong, until, pitching at length
upon his shoulder, he dislocated the bone, and lay
like one dead.

The Talisman



533



SYDNEY SMITH

1771-1845

327 poodle's Oration

' TVTHAT would our ancestors say to this, Sir ?

W How does this measure tally with their institu-
tions? How does it agree with their experience?
Are we to put the wisdom of yesterday in competition
with the wisdom of centuries? {Hear, hear!) Is
beardless youth to show no respect for the decisions
of mature age ? {Loud cries of bear ! hear !) If this
measure be light, would it have escaped the wisdom
of those Saxon progenitors to whom we are indebted
for so many of our best political institutions ? Would
the Dane have passed it over? Would the Norman
have rejected it ? Would such a notable discovery
have been reserved for these modern and degenerate
times ? Besides, Sir, if the measure itself is good, I ask
the honourable gentleman if this is the time for carrying
it into execution — whether, in fact, a more unfortunate
period could have been selected than that which he
has chosen ? If this were an ordinary measure, I should
not oppose it with so much vehemence ; but, Sir, it
calls in question the wisdom of an irrevocable iaw — of
a law passed at the memorable period of the Revolution.
What right have we, Sir, to break down this firm
column, on which the great men of that day stamped
a character of eternity? Are not all authorities
against this measure — Pitt, Fox, Cicero, and the
Attorney and Solicitor General? The proposition
is new, Sir ; it is the first time it was ever heard in
this House. I am not prepared, Sir — this House
is not prepared, to receive it. The measure implies
a distrust of his Majesty's government ; their dis-
approval is sufficient to warrant opposition. Precau-
534



SYDNEY SMITH

tion only is requisite where danger is apprehended.
Here the high character of the individuals in question
is a sufficient guarantee against any ground of alarm.
Give not, then, your sanction to this measure ; for,
whatever be its character, if you do give your sanction
to it, the same man by whom this is proposed, will
propose to you others to which it will be impossible
to give your consent. I care very little, Sir, for the
ostensible measure ; but what is there behind ? What
are the honouiable gentleman's future schemes? If
we pass this bill, what fresh concessions may he not
require? What further degradation is he planning
for his country ? Talk of evil and inconvenience,
Sir ! look to other countries — study other aggregations
and societies of men, and then see whether the laws
of this country demand a remedy or deserve a panegyric.
Was the honourable gentleman (let me ask him)
always of this way of thinking? Do I not remember
when he was the advocate in this House of very
opposite opinions ? I not only quarrel with his present
sentiments, Sir, but I declare very frankly, I do not
like the party with which he acts. If his own motives
were as pure as possible, they cannot but suffer
contamination from those with whom he is politically
associated. This measure may be a boon to the
constitution ; but I will accept no favour to the
constitution from such hands. (Loud cries of hear!
hear !) I profess myself, Sir, an honest and upright
member of the British Parliament, and I am not afraid
to profess myself an enemy to all change and all
innovation. I am satisfied with things as they are ;
and it will be my pride and pleasure to hand down
this country to my children as I received it from
those who preceded me. The honourable gentleman

535



SYDNEY SMITH

pretends to justify the severity with which he has
attacked the noble Lord who presides in the Court of
Chancery; but I say such attacks are pregnant with
mischief to Government itself. Oppose Ministers, you
oppose Government : disgrace Ministers, you disgrace
Government : bring Ministers into contempt, you
bring Government into contempt ; and anarchy and
civil war are the consequences. Besides, Sir, the
measure h unnecessary. Nobody complains of disorder
in that shape in which it is the aim of your measure
to propose a remedy to it. The business is one of the
greatest importance ; there is need of the greatest
caution and circumspection. Do not let us be preci-
pitate, Sir. It is impossible to foresee all consequences.
Everything should be gradual : the example of a neigh-
bouring nation should fill us with alarm ! The
honourable gentleman has taxed me with illiberality,
Sir. I deny the charge. I hate innovation ; but
I love improvement. I am an enemy to the corruption
of Government ; but I defend its influence. I dread
Reform ; but I dread it only when it is intemperate.
I consider the liberty of the Press as the great Palladium
of the Constitution ; but, at the same time, I hold
the licentiousness of the Press in the greatest abhor-
rence. Nobody is more conscious than I am of the
splendid abilities of the honourable mover ; but I tell
him at once his scheme is too good to be practicable.
It savours of Utopia. It looks well in theory ; but
it won't do in practice. It will not do, I repeat, Sir,
in practice ; and so the advocates of the measure
will find, if unfortunately it should find its way through
Parliament. (Cheers.) The source of that corruption
to which the honourable member alludes, is in the
minds of the people : so rank and extensive is that
536



SYDNEY SMITH

corruption, that no political reform can have any effect
in removing it. Instead of reforming others — instead
of reforming the State, the Constitution, and every-
thing that is most excellent, let each man reform
himself ! let him look at home ; he will find there
enough to do, without looking abroad, and aiming
at what is out of his power. (Loud Cheers.) And now,
Sir, as it is frequently the custom in this House to
end with a quotation, and as the gentleman who
preceded me in the debate has anticipated me in my
favourite quotation of " The strong pull and the
long pull ", — I shall end with the memorable words
of the assembled Barons — " Nolumus leges Anqhcs
mutari." '

Bentham on Fallacies

328 "Justice the c Root of 'Patriotism

THIS is what is called country. Equal rights to
unequal possessions, equal justice to the rich and
poor : this is what men come out to fight for, and to
defend. Such a country has no legal injuries to remem-
ber, no legal murders to revenge, no legal robbery to
redress ; it is strong in its justice ; it is then that the
use and object of all this assemblage of gentlemen and
arrangement of juries, and the deserved veneration in
which we hold the character of English judges, is under-
stood in all its bearings, and in its fullest effects ; men
die for such things — they cannot be subdued by foreign
force where such just practices prevail. The sword of
ambition is shivered to pieces against such a bulwark.
Nations fall where judges are unjust, because there is
nothing which the multitude think worth defending ;

537



SYDNEY SMITH

but nations do not fall which are treated as we are
treated, but they rise as we have risen, and they shine as
we have shone, and die as we have died, too much used
to justice, and too much used to freedom, to care for that
life which is not just and free. I call you all to witness
if there be any exaggerated picture in this ; the sword
is just sheathed, the flag is just furled, the last sound
of the trumpet has just died away. You all remember
what a spectacle this country exhibited ; one heart,
one voice — one weapon, one purpose. And why?
Because this country is a country of the law ; because
the judge is a judge for the peasant as well as for the
palace ; because every man's happiness is guarded by
fixed rules from tyranny and caprice. This town this
week, the business of the next few days, would explain
to any enlightened European why other nations did
fall in the storms of the world, and why we did not
fall. The Christian patience you may witness, the
impartiality of the judgment-seat, the disrespect of
persons, the disregard of consequences. These
attributes of justice do not end with arranging your
conflicting rights, and mine ; they give strength to
the English people, duration to the English name ;
they turn the animal courage of this people into moral
and religious courage, and present to the lowest of
mankind plain reasons and strong motives why they
should resist aggression from without, and bind them-
selves a living rampart round the land of their
birth.

The Judge that Smites Contrary to the Law



538



SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE



_ 1772-1834
329 T/ie Vale of Human Life

THE first range of hills, that encircles the scanty
vale of human life, is the horizon for the majority
of its inhabitants. On its ridges the common sun is
born and departs. From them the stars rise, and touch-
ing them they vanish. By the many, even this range,
the natural limit and bulwark of the vale, is but
imperfectly known. Its higher ascents are too often
hidden by mists and clouds from uncultivated swamps,
which few have courage or curiosity to penetrate.
To the multitude below these vapors appear, now
as the dark haunts of terrific agents, on which none
may intrude with impunity ; and now all a-glow, with
colors not their own, they are gazed at as the splendid
palaces of happiness and power. But in all ages there
have been a few who, measuring and sounding the
rivers of the vale at the feet of their furthest inaccessible
falls, have learned that the sources must be far higher
and far inward ; a few, who even in the level streams
have detected elements, which neither the vale itself
or the surrounding mountains contained or could
supply. How and whence to these thoughts, these
strong probabilities, the ascertaining vision, the
intuitive knowledge may finally supervene, can be
learnt only by the fact. I might oppose to the ques-
tion the words with which Plotinus supposes nature
to answer a similar difficulty. ' Should any one interro-
gate her, how she works, if graciously she vouchsafe to
listen and speak, she will reply, it behoves thee not to
disquiet me with interrogatories, but to understand in
silence even as I am silent, and work without words.'

Btographta Lilerarta
539



SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE



330 IQopstock

BELIEVE me, I walked with an impression of awe
on my spirits, as W and myself accompanied

Mr. Klopstock to the house of his brother, the poet,
which stands about a quarter of a mile from the city
gate. It is one of a row of little common-place
summer-houses (for so they looked) with four or five
rows of young meagre elm trees before the windows,
beyond which is a green, and then a dead flat inter-
sected with several roads. Whatever beauty (thought
I) may be before the poet's eyes at present, it must
certainly be purely of his own creation. We waited
a few minutes in a neat little parlour, ornamented
with the figures of two of the Muses and with prints,
the subjects of which were from Klopstock's odes. The
poet entered. I was much disappointed in his coun-
tenance, and recognised in it no likeness to the bust.
There was no comprehension in the forehead, no
weight over the eye-brows, no expression of peculiarity,
moral or intellectual, in the eyes, no massiveness in
the general countenance. He is, if anything, rather
below the middle size. He wore very large half-boots,
which his legs filled, so fearfully were they swoln.

However, though neither W nor myself could

discover any indications of sublimity or enthusiasm
in his physiognomy, we were both equally impressed
with his liveliness, and his kind and ready courtesy.
He talked in French with my friend, and with difficulty
spoke a few sentences to me in English. His enuncia-
tion was not in the least affected by the entire want
of his upper teeth. . .

The subject changed to literature, and I inquired
540



SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE



in Latin concerning the History of German poetry
and the elder German poets. To my great astonish-
ment he confessed that he knew very little on the
subject. He had indeed occasionally read one or two
of their elder writers, but not so as to enable him to
speak of their merits. Professor Ebeling, he said,
would probably give me every information of this
kind : the subject had not particularly excited his
curiosity. He then talked of Milton and Glover, and
thought Glover's blank verse superior to Milton's. . .

He told us that he had read Milton, in a prose
translation, when he was fourteen. I understood

him thus myself, and W interpreted Klopstock's

French as I had already construed it. He appeared
to know very little of Milton — or indeed of our poets
in general. He spoke with great indignation of the
English prose translation of his Messiah. All the
translations had been bad, very bad — but the English
was no translation — there were pages on pages not in
the original : — and half the original was not to be

found in the translation. W told him that

I intended to translate a few of his odes as specimens
of German lyrics — he then said to me in English,
' I wish you would render into English some select
passages of the Messiah, and revenge me of your
countryman ! ' It was the liveliest thing which he
produced in the whole conversation. He told us,
that his first ode was fifty years older than his last.
I looked at him with much emotion — I considered
him as the venerable father of German poetry ; as
a good man ; as a Christian ; seventy-four years
old ; with legs enormously swoln ; yet active, lively,
chearful, and kind, and communicative. My eyes
felt as if a tear were swelling into them. . .

54i



SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE

I must remind you, my friend, first, that these
notes are not intended as specimens of Klopstock's
intellectual power, or even ' colloquial prowess,'' to judge
of which by an accidental conversation, and this with
strangers, and those too foreigners, would be not only
unreasonable, but calumnious. Secondly, I attribute
little other interest to the remarks than what is derived
from the celebrity of the person who made them.
Lastly, if you ask me, whether I have read the Messiah,
and what I think of it f I answer — as yet the first four
books only : and as to my opinion (the reasons of
which hereafter) you may guess it from what I could
not help muttering to myself, when the good pastor
this morning told me, that Klopstock was the German
Milton ' a very German Milton indeed ! ! ! '

Biographta Ltteraria



331 The Verse and the Qloss

THE moving Moon went up the sky,
And no where did abide :
Softly she was going up,
And a star or two beside —

In his loneliness and fixedness he yearneth towards
the journeying Moon, and the stars that still sojourn,
yet still move onward ; and every where the blue sky
belongs to them, and is their appointed rest, and their
native country and their own natural homes, which
they enter unannounced, as lords that are certainly-
expected and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival.

Rime of the Ancient Mariner



542



SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE



332 Love of Stature

THE love of Nature is ever returned double to us,
not only the delighter in our delight, but by-
linking our sweetest, but of themselves perishable
feelings to distinct and vivid images, which we our-
selves, at times, and which a thousand casual recollec-
tions, recall to our memory. She is the preserver, the
treasurer of our joys. Even in sickness and nervous
diseases, she has peopled our imagination with lovely
forms which have sometimes overpowered the inward
pain and brought with them their old sensations.
And even when all men have seemed to desert us and
the friend of our heart has passed on, with one glance
from his ' cold disliking eye ' — yet even then the blue
heaven is spread out and bends over us, and the little
tree still shelters us under its plumage as a second
cope, a domestic firmament, and the low creeping
gale will sigh in the heath-plant and soothe us by
sound of sympathy till the lulled grief loses itself in
fixed gaze on the purple heath-blossom, till the
present beauty becomes a vision of memory.

Amma Poelae

ROBERT SOUTHEY

1774-1843

333 S^elsorfs Departure jrom 'Portsmouth

EARLY on the following morning he reached
Portsmouth j and having dispatched his business
on shore, endeavoured to elude the populace by taking
a by-way to the beach ; but a crowd collected in his
train, pressing forward, to obtain a sight of his face :
many were in tears, and many knelt down before him,

543



ROBERT SOUTHEY

and blessed him as he passed. England has had many
heroes ; but never one who so entirely possessed the
lore of his fellow-countrymen as Nelson. All men
knew that his heart was as humane as it was fearless ;
that there was not in his nature the slightest alloy
of selfishness or cupidity ; but that, with perfect and
entire devotion, he served his country with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his strength ;
and, therefore, they loved him as truly as and fervently
as he loved England. They pressed upon the parapet,
to gaze after him when his barge pushed off, and he was
returning their cheers by waving his hat. The sentinels,
who endeavoured to prevent them from trespassing
upon this ground, were wedged among the crowd ;
and an officer, who, not very prudently upon such an
occasion, ordered them to drive the people down with
their bayonets, was compelled speedily to retreat ; for
the people would not be debarred from gazing, till
the last moment, upon the hero — the darling hero of
England !

Life of Nelson

334 The ^Mourning for ZN^elson

THE death of Nelson was felt in England as some-
thing more than a public calamity ; men started
at the intelligence, and turned pale, as if they had heard
of the loss of a dear friend. An object of our admira-
tion and affection, of our pride and of our hopes, was
suddenly taken from us ; and it seemed as if we had
never, till then, known how deeply we loved and
reverenced him. What the country had lost in its
great naval hero — the greatest of our own, and of all
former times, was scarcely taken into the account of

544



ROBERT SOUTHEY



grief. So perfectly, indeed, had he performed his
part, that the maritime war, after the battle of
Trafalgar, was considered at an end : the fleets of the
enemy were not merely defeated, but destroyed :
new navies must be built, and a new race of seamen
reared for them, before the possibility of their invading
our shores could again be contemplated. It was not,
therefore, from any selfish reflection upon the magni-
tude of our loss that we mourned for him : the general
sorrow was of a higher character. The people of
England grieved that funeral ceremonies, and public
monuments, and posthumous rewards, were all which
they could now bestow upon him, whom the king,
the legislature, and the nation, would have alike
delighted to honour ; whom every tongue would have
blessed ; whose presence in every village through
which he might have passed would have wakened the
church bells, have given school-boys a holiday, have
drawn children from their sports to gaze upon him,
and ' old men from the chimney corner ', to look upon
Nelson ere they died. The victory of Trafalgar was
celebrated, indeed, with the usual forms of rejoicing,
but they were without joy ; for such already was the
glory of the British navy, through Nelson's surpassing
genius, that it scarcely seemed to receive any addition
from the most signal victory that ever was achieved
upon the seas : and the destruction of this mighty
fleet, by which all the maritime schemes of France
were totally frustrated, hardly appeared to add to
our security or strength ; for, while Nelson was living,
to watch the combined squadrons of the enemy, we
felt ourselves as secure as now, when they were no
longer in existence.

There was reason to suppose, from the appearances
2830 T 545



ROBERT SOUTHEY

upon opening the body, that, in the course of nature,
he might have attained, like his father, to a good old
age. Yet he cannot be said to have fallen prematurely
whose work was done ; nor ought he to be lamented,
who died so full of honours, and at the height of human
fame. The most triumphant death is that of the
martyr ; the most awful that of the martyred patriot ;
the most splendid that of the hero in the hour of
victory ; and if the chariot and the horses of fire had
been vouchsafed for Nelson's translation, he could
scarcely have departed in a brighter blaze of glory. He
has left us, not indeed his mantle of inspiration, but
a name and an example, which are at this hour inspiring
thousands of the youth of England : a name which is
our pride, and an example which will continue to be
our shield and our strength. Thus it is that the spirits
of the great and the wise continue to live and to act
after them ; verifying, in this sense, the knguage of
the old mythologist :

Toi ptv dnipoves (Itri Atof ptyuKov dia (iov\as
'jiaBKol, (7Tl\S6vlOt, (fiuXcucts dvi)T<*>p dv9pa>ira>v.

For gods they are, through high Jove's Counsels good,
Haunting the earth, the guardians of mankind.

Life of Nelson



JANE AUSTEN

1775-1817

335 The "John Dashwoods

IT was my father's last request to me,' replied her
husband, ' that I should assist his widow and
daughters.'

' He did not know what he was talking of, I dare
say ; ten to one but he was light-headed at the time.
546



JANE AUSTEN

Had he been in his right senses, he could not have
thought of such a thing as begging you to give away
half your fortune from your own child.'

4 He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my
dear Fanny ; he only requested me, in general terms,
to assist them, and make their situation more com-
fortable than it was in his power to do. Perhaps it
would have been as well if he had left it wholly to
myself. He could hardly suppose I should neglect
them. But as he required the promise, I could not
do less than give it : at least I thought so at the time.
The promise, therefore, was given, and must be per-
formed. Something must be done for them whenever
they leave Norland and settle in a new home.'

' Well, then, let something be done for them ; but
that something need not be three thousand pounds.
Consider,' she added, ' that when the money is once
parted with, it never can return. Your sisters will
marry, and it will be gone for ever. If, indeed, it
could ever be restored to our poor little boy — '

' Why, to be sure,' said her husband, very gravely,
' that would make a great difference. The time may
come when Harry will regret that so large a sum was
parted with. If he should have a numerous family, for
instance, it would be a very convenient addition.'

' To be sure it would.'

' Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties
if the sum were diminished one-half. — Five hundred
pounds would be a prodigious increase to their
fortunes ! '

' Oh ! beyond any thing great ! What brother on
earth would do half so much for his sisters, even if
really his sisters ! And as it is — only half blood ! —
But you have such a generous spirit ! '

' I would not wish to do anything mean,' he replied.

547



JANE AUSTEN

' One had rather, on such occasions, do too much than
too little. No one, at least, can think I have not done
enough for them : even themselves, they can hardly
expect more.'

' There is no knowing what they may expect,' said
the lady, ' but we are not to think of their expectations :
the question is, what you can afford to do.'

' Certainly — and I think I may afford to give them
five hundred pounds a-piece. As it is, without any
addition of mine, they will each have above three
thousand pounds on their mother's death — a very
comfortable fortune for any young woman.'

1 To be sure it is : and, indeed, it strikes me that they
can want no addition at all. They will have ten
thousand pounds divided amongst them. If they
marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they
do not, they may all live very comfortably together
on the interest of ten thousand pounds.'

' That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know
whether, upon the whole, it would not be more advis-
able to do something for their mother while she lives
rather than for them — something of the annuity kind
I mean. — My sisters would feel the good effects of
it as well as herself. A hundred a year would make
them all perfectly comfortable.'

His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her
consent to this plan.

' To be sure,' said she, ' it is better than parting
with fifteen hundred pounds at once. But then if
Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen years, we shall be
completely taken in.'

' Fifteen years ! my dear Fanny ; her life cannot
be worth half that purchase.'

' Certainly not ; but if you observe, people always
548



JANE AUSTEN

live for ever when there is any annuity to be paid
them ; and she is very stout and healthy, and hardly
forty. An annuity is a very serious business ; it
comes over and over every year, and there is no getting
rid of it. You are not aware of what you are doing.
I have known a great deal of the trouble of annuities ;
for my mother was clogged with the payment of three
to old superannuated servants by my father's will,
and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it. Twice
every year these annuities were to be paid ; and then
there was the trouble of getting it to them ; and then
one of them was said to have died, and afterwards
it turned out to be no such thing. My mother was
quite sick of it. Her income was not her own, she said,
with such perpetual claims on it ; and it was the more
unkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money
would have been entirely at my mother's disposal,
without any restriction whatever. It has given me
such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I
would not pin myself down to the payment of one
for all the world.'

' It is certainly an unpleasant thing,' replied
Mr. Dashwood, ' to have those kind of yearly drains
on one's income. One's fortune, as your mother
justly says, is not one's own. To be tied down to the
regular payment of such a sum, on every rent day, is
by no means desirable : it takes away one's inde-
pendence.'

' Undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks
for it. They think themselves secure, you do no more
than what is expected, and it raises no gratitude at
all. If I were you, whatever I did should be done at
my own discretion entirely. I would not bind myself
to allow them any thing yearly. It may be very

549



JANE AUSTEN

inconvenient some years to spare a hundred, or even
fifty pounds from our own expences.'

' I believe you are right, my love ; it will be better
that there should be no annuity in the case ; whatever
I may give them occasionally will be of far greater
assistance than a yearly allowance, because they would
only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of
a larger income, and would not be sixpence the richer
for it at the end of the year. It will certainly be much
the best way. A present of fifty pounds, now and then,
will prevent their ever being distressed for money,
and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise
to my father.'

' To be sure it will. Indeed, to say the truth, I am
convinced within myself that your father had no idea
of your giving them any money at all. The assistance
he thought of, I dare say, was only such as might be
reasonably expected of you ; for instance, such as
looking out for a comfortable small house for them,
helping them to move their things, and sending them
presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever
they are in season. I'll lay my life that he meant
nothing farther ; indeed, it would be very strange
and unreasonable if he did. Do but consider, my dear
Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your
mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the
interest of seven thousand pounds, besides the thousand
pounds belonging to each of the girls, which brings
them in fifty pounds a-year a-piece, and, of course,
they will pay their mother for their board out of it.
Altogether, they will have five hundred a-year amongst
them, and what on earth can four women want for
more than that ? — They will live so cheap ! Their
housekeeping will be nothing at all. They will have
55°



JANE AUSTEN

no carriage, no horses, and hardly any servants ; they
will keep no company, and can have no expences of
any kind ! Only conceive how comfortable they will
be ! Five hundred a-year ! I am sure I cannot
imagine how they will spend half of it ; and as to your
giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it.
They will be much more able to give you something.'

' Upon my word,' said Mr. Dashwood, ' I believe
you are perfectly right. My father certainly could
mean nothing more by his request to me than what
you say. I clearly understand it now, and I will
strictly fulfil my engagement by such acts of assistance
and kindness to them as you have described. When
my mother removes into another house my services
shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as
I can. Some little present of furniture too may be
acceptable then.'

' Certainly,' returned Mrs. John Dashwood. ' But
however, one thing must be considered. When your
father and mother moved to Norland, though the
furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate,
and linen was saved, and is now left to your mother.
Her house will therefore be almost completely fitted
up as soon as she takes it.'

' That is a material consideration undoubtedly. A
valuable legacy indeed ! And yet some of the plate
would have been a very pleasant addition to our own
stock here.' •

' Yes ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as
handsome as what belongs to this house. A great
deal too handsome, in my opinion, for any place they
can ever afford to live in. But, however, so it is. Your
father thought only of them. And I must say this :
that you owe no particular gratitude to him, nor

55i



JANE AUSTEN



attention to his wishes, for we very well know that if
he could, he would have left almost every thing in
the world to them?

This argument was irresistible. It gave to his
intentions whatever of decision was wanting before ;
and he finally resolved, that it would be absolutely
unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for
the widow and children of his father, than such kind
of neighbourly acts as his own wife pointed out.

Sense and Sensibility

336 ^Mansfield c Park

ABOUT thirty years ago, Miss Maria Ward of
jt\. Huntingdon, with only seven thousand pounds,
had the good luck to captivate Sir Thomas Bertram, of
Mansfield Park, in the county of Northampton, and
to be thereby raised to the rank of a baronet's lady,
with all the comforts and consequences of an handsome
house and large income. All Huntingdon exclaimed
on the greatness of the match, and her uncle, the
lawyer, himself, allowed her to be at least three thou-
sand pounds short of any equitable claim to it. She
had two sisters to be benefited by her elevation ;
and such of their acquaintance as thought Miss Ward
and Miss Frances quite as handsome as Miss Maria,
did not scruple to predict their marrying with almost
equal advantage. But there certainly are not so many
men of large fortune in the world, as there are pretty
women to deserve them. Miss Ward, at the end of
half a dozen years, found herself obliged to be attached
to the Rev. Mr. Norris, a friend of her brother-in-law,
with scarcely any private fortune, and Miss Frances
fared yet worse. Miss Ward's match, indeed, when it
552



JANE AUSTEN

came to the point, was not contemptible, Sir Thomas
being happily able to give his friend an income in the
living of Mansfield, and Mr. and Mrs. Norris began
their career of conjugal felicity with very little less
than a thousand a year. But Miss Frances married,
in the common phrase, to disoblige her family, and by
fixing on a Lieutenant of Marines, without education,
fortune, or connections, did it very thoroughly. She
could hardly have made a more untoward choice.
Sir Thomas Bertram had interest, which, from principle
as well as pride, from a general wish of doing right,
and a desire of seeing all that were connected with him
in situations of respectability, he would have been
glad to exert for the advantage of Lady Bertram's
sister ; but her husband's profession was such as no
interest could reach ; and before he had time to devise
any other method of assisting them, an absolute breach
between the sisters had taken place. It was the
natural result of the conduct of each party, and such
as a very imprudent marriage almost always produces.
To save herself from useless remonstrance, Mrs. Price
never wrote to her family on the subject till actually
married. Lady Bertram, who was a woman of very
tranquil feelings, and a temper remarkably easy and
indolent, would have contented herself with merely
giving up her sister, and thinking no more of the
matter : but Mrs. Norris had a spirit of activity,
which could not be satisfied till she had written a long
and angry letter to Fanny, to point out the folly of
her conduct, and threaten her with all its possible ill
consequences. Mrs. Price in her turn was injured
and angry ; and an answer which comprehended each
sister in its bitterness, and bestowed such very dis-
respectful reflections on the pride of Sir Thomas, as

553



JANE AUSTEN



Mrs. Norris could not possibly keep to herself, put
an end to all intercourse between them for a consider-
able period.

Mansfield Park

337 £Miss 'Bates at the "Ball

MISS BATES and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the
two gentlemen, walked into the room ; and
Mrs. Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as
Mrs. Weston's to receive them. Her gestures and
movements might be understood by any one who
looked on like Emma, but her words, every body's words,
were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates,
who came in talking, and had not finished her speech
under many minutes after her being admitted into
the circle at the fire. As the door opened she was
heard,

' So very obliging of you ! — No rain at all. Nothing
to signify. I do not care for myself. Quite thick
shoes. And Jane declares — Well ! — (as soon as she was
within the door) Well ! This is brilliant indeed ! —
This is admirable ! — Excellently contrived, upon my
word. Nothing wanting. Could not have imagined
it. — So well lighted up. — Jane, Jane, look — did you
ever see any thing ? Oh ! Mr. Weston, you must
really have had Aladdin's lamp. Good Mrs. Stokes
would not know her own room again. I saw her as
I came in ; she was standing in the entrance. " Oh !
Mrs. Stokes," said I — but I had not time for more.' —
She was now met by Mrs. Weston. — ' Very well,
I thank you, ma'am. I hope you are quite well. Very
happy to hear it. So afraid you might have a head-
ach ! — seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how
554



JANE AUSTEN

much trouble you must have. Delighted to hear it
indeed. Ah ! dear Mrs. Elton, so obliged to you
for the carriage ! — excellent time. — Jane and I quite
ready. Did not keep the horses a moment. Most
comfortable carriage. — Oh ! and I am sure our thanks
are due to you, Mrs. Weston, on that score. Mrs.
Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note, or we should
have been. — But two such offers in one day ! — Never
were such neighbours. I said to my mother, " Upon

my word, ma'am ." Thank you, my mother is

remarkably well. Gone to Mr. Woodhouse's. I made
her take her shawl — for the evenings are not warm —
her large new shawl — Mrs. Dixon's wedding present. —
So kind of her to think of my mother ! Bought at
Weymouth, you know — Mr. Dixon's choice. There
were three others, Jane says, which they hesitated
about some time. Colonel Campbell rather preferred
an olive. My dear Jane, are you suie you did not wet
your feet ? — It was but a drop or two, but I am so
afraid ■ — but Mr. Frank Churchill was so extremely —
and there was a mat to step upon — I shall never
forget his extreme politeness. — Oh ! Mr. Frank
Churchill, I must tell you my mother's spectacles
have never been in fault since ; the rivet never came
out again. My mother often talks of your goodnature.
Does not she, Jane ? — Do not we often talk of Mr.
Frank Churchill ? — Ah ! here 's Miss Woodhouse. —
Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you do? — Very well
I thank you, quite well. This is meeting quite in
fairy-land ! — Such a transformation ! — Must not com-
pliment, I know — (eyeing Emma most complacently) —
that would be rude — but upon my word, Miss Wood-
house, you do look — how do you like Jane's hair ? —
You are a judge. — She did it all herself. Quite wonder-

555



JANE AUSTEN



ful how she does her hair ! — No hairdresser from
London I think could. — Ah ! Dr. Hughes I declare —
and Mrs. Hughes. Must go and speak to Dr. and
Mrs. Hughes for a moment. — How do you do ? How
do you do ? — Very well, I thank you. This is delight-
ful, is not it ? — Where 's dear Mr. Richard ? — Oh !
there he is. Don't disturb him. Much better
employed talking to the young ladies. How do you
do, Mr. Richard ? — I saw you the other day as you

rode through the town Mrs. Otway, I protest ! —

and good Mr. Otway, and Miss Otway and Miss
Caroline. — Such a host of friends ! — and Mr. George
and Mr. Arthur ! — How do you do ? How do you
all do? — Quite well, I am much obliged to you.
Never better. — Don't I hear another carriage ? — Who
can this be? — very likely the worthy Coles. — Upon
my word, this is charming to be standing about among
such friends ! And such a noble fire ! — I am quite
roasted. No coffee, I thank you, for me — never take
coffee. — A little tea if you please, sir, by and bye, —
no hurry — Oh ! here it comes. Everything so good ! '

Emma

CHARLES LAMB

1775-1834

338 The Old Margate Hoy

\ LL this time sat upon the edge of the deck quite
a different character. It was a lad, apparently
very poor, very infirm, and very patient. His eye was
ever on the sea, with a smile : and, if he caught now
and then some snatches of these wild legends, it was
by accident, and they seemed not to concern him.
The waves to him whispered more pleasant stories.
556



CHARLES LAMB



He was as one, being with us, but not of us. He heard
the bell of dinner ring without stirring ; and when
some of us pulled out our private stores — our cold
meat and our salads — he produced none, and seemed
to want none. Only a solitary biscuit he had laid in ;
provision for the one or two days and nights, to
which these vessels then were oftentimes obliged to
prolong their voyage. Upon a nearer acquaintance
with him, which he seemed neither to court nor
decline, we learned that he was going to Margate,
with the hope of being admitted into the Infirmary
there for sea-bathing. His disease was a scrofula,
which appeared to have eaten all over him. He
expressed great hopes of a cure ; and when we asked
him, whether he had any friends where he was going,
he replied, ' he had no friends.'

Last Essays of Elia

33g ^Amicus redivivus

Where were ye, Nymphs, when the remorseless deep
Clos'd o'er the head of your loved Lycidas ?

I DO not know when I have experienced a stranger
sensation, than on seeing my old friend G. D., who
had been paying me a morning visit a few Sundays
back, at my cottage at Islington, upon taking leave,
instead of turning down the right hand path by which
he had entered — with staff in hand, and at noon day,
deliberately march right forwards into the midst of
the stream that runs by us, and totally disappear.

A spectacle like this at dusk would have been appal-
ling enough ; but, in the broad open daylight, to
witness such an unreserved motion towards self-
destruction in a valued friend, took from me all power
of speculation.

557



CHARLES LAMB



How I found my feet, I know not. Consciousness
was quite gone. Some spirit, not my own, whirled
me to the spot. I remember nothing but the silvery
apparition of a good white head emerging ; nigh which
a staff (the hand unseen that wielded it) pointed
upwards, as feeling for the skies. In a moment (if
time was in that time) he was on my shoulders, and
I — freighted with a load more precious than his who
bore Anchises.

And here I cannot but do justice to the officious
zeal of sundry passers by, who, albeit arriving a little
too late to participate in the honours of the rescue,
in philanthropic shoals came thronging to communi-
cate their advice as to the recovery ; prescribing
variously the application, or non-application, of salt,
&c, to the person of the patient. Life meantime was
ebbing fast away, amidst the stifle of conflicting judge-
ments, when one, more sagacious than the rest, by
a bright thought, proposed sending for the Doctor.
Trite as the counsel was, and impossible, as one should
think, to be missed on, — shall I confess ? — in this
emergency, it was to me as if an Angel had spoken.
Great previous exertions — and mine had not been
inconsiderable — are commonly followed by a debility
of purpose. This was a moment of irresolution.

Monoculus — for so, in default of catching his true
name, I choose to designate the medical gentleman
who now appeared — is a grave, middle-aged person,
who, without having studied at the college, or truckled
to the pedantry of a diploma, hath employed a great
portion of his valuable time in experimental processes
upon the bodies of unfortunate fellow-creatures, in
whom the vital spark, to mere vulgar thinking, would
seem extinct, and lost for ever. He omitteth no
558



CHARLES LAMB

occasion of obtruding his services, from a case of com-
mon surfeit-suffocation to the ignobler obstructions,
sometimes induced by a too wilful application of the
plant Cannabis outwardly. But though he declineth
not altogether these drier extinctions, his occupation
tendeth for the most part to water-practice ; for the
convenience of which, he hath judiciously fixed his
quarters near the grand repository of the stream
mentioned, where, day and night, from his little
watch-tower, at the Middleton's-Head, he hsteneth
to detect the wrecks of drowned mortality — partly,
as he saith, to be upon the spot — and partly, because
the liquids which he useth to prescribe to himself and
his patients, on these distressing occasions, are ordinarily
more conveniently to be found at these common
hostelries, than in the shops and phials of the apothe-
caries. His ear hath arrived to such finesse by practice,
that it is reported, he can distinguish a plunge at
a half furlong distance ; and can tell, if it be casual
or deliberate. He weareth a medal, suspended over
a suit, originally of a sad brown, but which, by time,
and frequency of nightly divings, has been dinged
into a true professional sable. He passeth by the
name of Doctor, and is remarkable for wanting his
left eye. His remedy — after a sufficient application
of warm blankets, friction, &c, is a simple tumbler,
or more, of the purest Cognac, with water, made as
hot as the convalescent can bear it. Where he findeth,
as in the case of my friend, a squeamish subject, he
condescendeth to be the taster ; and showeth, by his
own example, the innocuous nature of the prescription.
Nothing can be more kind or encouraging than this
procedure. It addeth confidence to the patient, to
see his medical adviser go hand in hand with himself

559



CHARLES LAMB



in the remedy. When the doctor swalloweth his own
draught, what peevish invalid can refuse to pledge
him in the potion ? In fine, Monoculus is a humane,
sensible man, who, for a slender pittance, scarce
enough to sustain life, is content to wear it out in
the endeavour to save the lives of others — his pre-
tensions so moderate, that with difficulty I could press
a crown upon him, for the price of restoring the
existence of such an invaluable creature to society
as G. D.

It was pleasant to observe the effect of the subsiding
alarm upon the nerves of the dear absentee. It seemed
to have given a shake to memory, calling up notice
after notice, of all the providential deliverances he
had experienced in the course of his long and innocent
life. Sitting up in my couch — my couch which, naked
and void of furniture hitherto, for the salutary repose
which it administered, shall be honoured with costly
valance, at some price, and henceforth be a state-bed
at Colebrooke, — he discoursed of marvellous escapes —
by carelessness of nurses — by pails of gelid, and
kettles of the boiling element, in infancy- — by orchard
pranks, and snapping twigs, in schoolboy frolics — by
descent of tiles at Trumpington, and of heavier tomes
at Pembroke — by studious watchmgs, inducing fright-
ful vigilance — by want, and the fear of want, and all
the sore throbbings of the learned head. — Anon, he
would burst out into little fragments of chaunting — of
songs long ago — ends of deliverance-hymns, not
remembered before since childhood, but coming up
now, when his heart was made tender as a child's — for
the tremor cordis, in the retrospect of a recent deliver-
ance, as in a case of impending danger, acting upon
an innocent heart, will produce a self-tenderness,
560



CHARLES LAMB



which we should do ill to christen cowardice ; and
Shakspeare, in the latter crisis, has made his good
Sir Hugh to remember the sitting by Babylon, and to
mutter of shallow rivers.

Waters of Sir Hugh Middleton — what a spark you
were like to have extinguished for ever ! Your
salubrious streams to this City, for now near two
centuries, would hardly have atoned for what you were
in a moment washing away. Mockeiy of a river —
liquid artifice — wretched conduit ! henceforth rank
with canals, and sluggish aqueducts. Was it for this,
that, smit in boyhood with the explorations of that
Abyssinian traveller, I paced the vales of Amwell to
explore your tributary springs, to trace your salutary
waters sparkling through green Hertfordshire and
cultured Enfield parks ? — Ye have no swans — no
Naiads — no river God — or did the benevolent hoary
aspect of my friend tempt ye to suck him in, that ye
also might have the tutelary genius of your waters ?

Had he been drowned in Cam there would have
been some consonancy in it ; but what willows had
ye to wave and rustle over his moist sepulture? — or,
having no name, besides that unmeaning assumption
of eternal novity, did ye think to get one by the noble
prize, and henceforth to be termed the Stream
Dyerian ?

And could such spacious virtue find a grave
Beneath the imposthumed bubble of a wave i

I protest, George, you shall not venture out again —
no, not by daylight — without a sufficient pair of
spectacles — in your musing moods especially. Your
absence of mind we have borne, till your presence of
body came to be called in question by it. You shall

561



CHARLES LAMB



not go wandering into Euripus with Aristotle, if we
can help it. Fie, man, to turn dipper at your years,
after your many tracts in favour of sprinkling only !

I have nothing but water in my head o' nights since
this frightful accident. Sometimes I am with Clarence
in his dream. At others, I behold Christian beginning
to sink, and crying out to his good brother Hopeful
(that is to me), ' I sink in deep waters ; the billows go
over my head, all the waves go over me. Selah.'
Then I have before me Palinurus, just letting go the
steerage. I cry out too late to save. Next follow —
a mournful procession — suicidal faces, saved against
their wills from drowning ; dolefully trailing a length
of reluctant gratefulness, with ropy weeds pendant
from locks of watchet hue — constrained Lazari —
Pluto's half-subjects — stolen fees from the graven —
bilking Charon of his fare. At their head Anon — or
is it G. D. ? — in his singing garments marcheth singly,
with harp in hand, and votive garland, which Machaon
(or Dr. Hawes) snatcheth straight, intending to
suspend it to the stern God of Sea. Then follow dismal
streams of Lethe, in which the half-drenched on earth
are constrained to drown downright, by wharfs where
Ophelia twice acts her muddy death.

And, doubtless, there is some notice in that invisible
world, when one of us approacheth (as my friend did
so lately) to their inexorable precincts. When a soul
knocks once, twice, at death's door, the sensation
aroused within the palace must be considerable ; and
the grim Feature, by modern science so often dis-
possessed of his prey, must have learned by this time
to pity Tantalus.

A pulse assuredly was felt along the line of the
Elysian shades, when the near arrival of G. D. was
562



CHARLES LAMB



announced by no equivocal indications. From their
seats of Asphodel arose the gentler and the graver
ghosts — poet, or historian — of Grecian or of Roman
lore — to crown with unfading chaplets the half-
finished love-labours of their unwearied scholiast.
Him Markland expected — him Tyrwhitt hoped to
encounter — him the sweet lyrist of Peter House,
whom he had barely seen upon earth, with newest

airs prepared to greet ; and, patron of the gentle

Christ's boy, — who should have been his patron through
life — the mild Askew, with longing aspirations, leaned
foremost from his venerable yEsculapian chair, to
welcome into that happy company the matured virtues
of the man, whose tender scions in the boy he himself
upon earth had so prophetically fed and watered.

Last Essays of Eha

340 Old Qhina

I WAS pointing out to my cousin last evening, over
our Hyson (which we are old fashioned enough to
drink unmixed still of an afternoon) some of these
speciosa miracula upon a set of extraordinary old blue
china (a recent purchase) which we were now for the
first time using ; and could not help remarking, how
favourable circumstances had been to us of late years,
that we could afford to please the eye sometimes with
trifles of this sort — when a passing sentiment seemed
to over-shade the brows of my companion. I am
quick at detecting these summer clouds in Bridget.

' I wish the good old times would come again', she
said, ' when we were not quite so rich. I do not mean,
that I want to be poor ; but there was a middle state ; '
— so she was pleased to ramble on, — ' in which I am

S63



CHARLES LAMB



sure we were a great deal happier. A purchase is but
a purchase, now that you have money enough and to
spare. Formerly it used to be a triumph. When we
coveted a cheap luxury (and, O ! how much ado I had
to get you to consent in those times !) we were used
to have a debate two or three days before, and to
weigh the for and against, and think what we might
spare it out of, and what saving we could hit upon,
that should be an equivalent. A thing was worth
buying then, when we felt the money that we paid
for it.

' Do you remember the brown suit, which you made
to hang upon you, till all your friends cried shame
upon you, it grew so thread-bare — and all because of
that folio Beaumont and Fletcher, which you dragged
home late at night from Barker's in Covent-garden i
Do you remember how we eyed it for weeks before
we could make up our minds to the purchase, and had
not come to a determination till it was near ten o'clock
of the Saturday night, when you set off from Islington,
fearing you should be too late — and when the old
bookseller with some grumbling opened his shop, and
by the twinkling taper (for he was setting bedwards)
lighted out the relic from his dusty treasures — and
when you lugged it home, wishing it were twice as
cumbersome — and when you presented it to me — and
when we were exploring the perfectness of it (collating
you called it) — and while I was repairing some of
the loose leaves with paste, which your impatience
would not suffer to be left till day-break — was there
no pleasure in being a poor man? or can those neat
black clothes which you wear now, and are so careful
to keep brushed, since we have become rich and finical,
give you half the honest vanity, with which you
564



CHARLES LAMB



flaunted it about in that over-worn suit — your old
corbeau — for four or five weeks longer than you
should have done, to pacify your conscience for the
mighty sum of fifteen — or sixteen shillings was it ? —
a great affair we thought it then — which you had
lavished on the old folio. Now you can afford to buy
any book that pleases you, but I do not see that you
ever bring me home any nice old purchases now.

' When you came home with twenty apologies for
laying out a less number of shillings upon that print
after Lionardo, which we christened the ' Lady
Blanch ' ; when you looked at the purchase, and
thought of the money — and thought of the money,
and looked again at the picture — was there no pleasure
in being a poor man f Now, you have nothing to
do but to walk into Colnaghi's, and buy a wilderness
of Lionardos. Yet do you i

' Then, do you remember our pleasant walks to
Enfield, and Potter's Bar, and Waltham, when we had
a holyday — holydays, and all other fun, are gone, now
we are rich — and the little hand-basket in which I used
to deposit our day's fare of savory cold lamb and
salad — and how you would pry about at noon-tide
for some decent house, where we might go in, and
produce our store — only paying for the ale that you
must call for — and speculate upon the looks of the
landlady, and whether she was likely to allow us
a table-cloth — and wish for such another honest
hostess, as Izaak Walton has described many a one
on the pleasant banks of the Lea, when he went
a fishing — and sometimes they would prove obliging
enough, and sometimes they would look grudgingly
upon us — but we had cheerful looks still for one
another, and would eat our plain food savorily,

565



CHARLES LAMB



scarcely grudging Piscator his Trout Hall? Now,
when we go out a day's pleasuring, which is seldom
moreover, we ride part of the way — and go into a fine
inn, and order the best of dinners, never debating
the expense — which, after all, never has half the relish
of those chance country snaps, when we were at the
mercy of uncertain usage, and a precarious welcome.

' You are too proud to see a play anywhere now but
in the pit. Do you remember where it was we used
to sit, when we saw the Battle of Hexham, and the
Surrender of Calais, and Bannister and Mrs. Bland
in the Children in the Wood — when we squeezed
out our shillings a-piece to sit three or four times in
a season in the one-shilling gallery — where you felt
all the time that you ought not to have brought me —
and more strongly I felt obligation to you for having
brought me — and the pleasure was the better for
a little shame — and when the curtain drew up, what
cared we for our place in the house, or what mattered
it where we were sitting, when our thoughts were with
Rosalind in Arden, or with Viola at the Court of
Illyria ? You used to say, that the gallery was the
best place of all for enjoying a play socially — that the
relish of such exhibitions must be in proportion to
the infrequency of -going — that the company we met
there, not being in general readers of plays, were
obliged to attend the more, and did attend, to what
was going on, on the stage — because a word lost would
have been a chasm, which it was impossible for them
to fill up. With such reflections we consoled our pride
then — and I appeal to you, whether, as a woman, I met
generally with less attention and accommodation,
than I have done since in more expensive situations
in the house ? The getting in indeed, and the crowding
566



CHARLES LAMB



up those inconvenient staircases, was bad enough, — but
there was still a law of civility to women recognised
to quite as great an extent as we ever found in the
other passages — and how a little difficulty overcome
heightened the snug seat, and the play, afterwards !
Now we can only pay our money, and walk in. You
cannot see, you say, in the galleries now. I am sure
we saw, and heard too, well enough then — but sight,
and all, I think, is gone with our poverty.'

Last Essays of Eha

341 "Dream Children

HERE the children fell a crying, and asked if
their little mourning which they had on was
not for uncle John, and they looked up, and prayed
me not to go on about their uncle, but to tell them
some stories about their pretty dead mother. Then
I told how for seven long years, in hope sometimes,
sometimes in despair, yet persisting ever, I courted
the fair Alice W — n ; and, as much as children could
understand, I explained to them what coyness, and
difficulty, and denial meant in maidens — when
suddenly, turning to Alice, the soul of the first Alice
looked out at her eyes with such a reality of re-present-
ment, that I became in doubt which of them stood
there before me, or whose that bright hair was ; and
while I stood gazing, both the children gradually
grew fainter to my view, receding, and still receding
till nothing at last but two mournful features were seen
in the uttermost distance, which, without speech,
strangely impressed upon me the effects of speech :
' We are not of Alice, nor of thee, nor are we children
at all. The children of Alice call Bartrum father.



567



CHARLES LAMB



We are nothing ; less than nothing, and dreams.
We are only what might have been, and must wait
upon the tedious shores of Lethe millions of ages

before we have existence, and a name ' and

immediately awaking, I found myself quietly seated in
my bachelor arm-chair, where I had fallen asleep.

Elia

342 *A Londoner in Qrain

I OUGHT before this to have reply'd to your very
kind invitation into Cumberland. With you and
your Sister I could gang anywhere. But I am afraid
whether I shall ever be able to afford so desperate
a Journey. Separate from the pleasure of your com-
pany, I don't much care if I never see a mountain in
my life. I have passed all my days in London, until
I have formed as many and intense local attachments,
as any of you mountaineers can have done with dead
nature. The Lighted shops of the Strand and Fleet
Street, the innumerable trades, tradesmen and cus-
tomers, coaches, waggons, playhouses, all the bustle
and wickedness round about Covent Garden, the very
women of the Town, the Watchmen, drunken scenes,
rattles, — life awake, if you awake, at all hours of the
night, the impossibility of being dull in Fleet Street,
the crowds, the very dirt & mud, the Sun shining upon
houses and pavements, the print shops, the old book
stalls, parsons cheap'ning books, coffee houses, steams
of soups from kitchens, the pantomimes, London itself
a pantomime and a masquerade, — all these things work
themselves into my mind and feed me, without a power
of satiating me. The wonder of these sights impells
me into night-walks about her crowded streets, and
568



CHARLES LAMB



I often shed tears in the Strand from fulness of joy at
so much Life. — All these emotions must be strange
to you. So are your rural emotions to me. But
consider, what must I have been doing all my life, not
to have lent great portions of my heart with usury to
such scenes ? —

My attachments are all local, purely local. I have
no passion (or have had none since I was in love, and
then it was the spurious engendering of poetry &
books) to groves and vallies. The rooms where I was
born, the furniture which has been before my eyes all
my life, a book case which has followed me about (like
a faithful dog, only exceeding him in knowledge)
wherever I have moved — old chairs, old tables, streets,
squares, where I have sunned myself, my old school, —
these are my mistresses. Have I not enough, without
your mountains? . . .

Letter to William Wordsworth, jo Jan. 1801

343 Writing for aAntiquity

RUMOUR tells us that Miss Holcroft is married. . .
Who is Badman, or Bed'em ? Have I seen him
at Montacute's f I hear he is a great chymist. I am
sometimes chymical myself. A thought strikes me with
horror. Pray heaven he may not have done it for the
sake of trying chymical experiments upon her — young
female subjects are so scarce ! . . . An't you glad about
Burke's case ! We may set off the Scotch murders
against the Scotch novels — Hare, the Great Unhanged.

M. B. is richly worth your knowing. He is on the
top scale of my friendship ladder, on which an angel
or two is still climbing, and some, alas ! descending. . .
Did you see a sonnet of mine in Blackwood's last!

c6g



CHARLES LAMB



Curious construction ! Elaborata facilitas ! And now
I'll tell. 'Twas written for ' The Gem,' but the editors
declined it, on the plea that it would shock all mothers ;
so they published ' The Widow ' instead. I am born
out of time. I have no conjecture about what the
present world calls delicacy. I thought ' Rosamund
Gray ' was a pretty modest thing. Hessey assures me
that the world would not bear it. I have lived to
grow into an indecent character. When my sonnet
was rejected, I exclaimed, ' Hang the age, I will write
for Antiquity ! ' . .

Blackwood sent me £20 for the drama. Somebody
cheated me out of it next day ; and my new pair of
breeches, just sent home, cracking at first putting on,
I exclaimed, in my wrath, ' All tailors are cheats and
all men are tailors.' Then I was better.

Letter to Bryan Waller Procter, 22 Jan. iS2<)



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR

1775-1864

344 £Mentem mortalia tangunt

T)HODOPE. . . . Let me pause and consider a little,
Xx if y ou please. I begin to suspect that, as gods
formerly did, you have been turning men into beasts,
and beasts into men. But, Aesop, you should never
say the thing that is untrue.

Aesop. We say and do and look no other all our lives.

Rhodope. Do we never know better ?

Aesop. Yes ; when we cease to please, and to wish
it ; when death is settling the features, and the
cerements are ready to render them unchangeable.

Rhodope. Alas ! alas !
57°



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



Aesop. Breathe, Rhodope ! breathe again those
painless sighs : they belong to thy vernal season. May
thy summer of life be calm, thy autumn calmer, and
thy winter never come !

Rhodope. I must die then earlier.

Aesop. Laodameia died ; Helen died ; Leda, the
beloved of Jupiter, went before. It is better to repose
in the earth betimes than to sit up late ; better, than
to cling pertinaciously to what we feel crumbling
under us, and to protract an inevitable fall. We may
enjoy the present, while we are insensible of infirmity
and decay ; but the present, like a note in music, is
nothing but as it appertains to what is past and what
is to come. There are no fields of amaranth on this
side of the grave ; there are no voices, O Rhodope,
that are not soon mute, however tuneful ; there is no
name, with whatever emphasis of passionate love
repeated, of which the echo is not faint at last.

Rhodope. O Aesop ! let me rest my head on yours :
it throbs and pains me.

Aesop. What are these ideas to thee ?

Rhodope. Sad, sorrowful.

Aesop. Harrows that break the soil, preparing it
for wisdom. Many flowers must perish ere a grain of
corn be ripened. And now remove thy head : the
cheek is cool enough after its little shower of tears.

Aesop and Rhodope



345 Ithodope's Father

T)HODOPE. Never shall I forget the morning
when my father, sitting in the coolest part of the
house, exchanged his last measure of grain for a chlamys
of scarlet cloth fringed with silver. He watched the

S7i



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



merchant out of the door, and then looked wistfully
into the corn-chest. I, who thought there was some-
thing worth seeing, looked in also, and, finding it
empty, expressed my disappointment, not thinking
however about the corn. A faint and transient smile
came over his countenance at the sight of mine. He
unfolded the chlamys, stretching it out with both
hands before me, and then cast it over my shoulders.
I looked down on the glittering fringe and screamed
with joy. He then went out ; and I know not what
flowers he gathered, but he gathered many ; and some
he placed in my bosom, and some in my hair. But
I told him with captious pride, first that I could
arrange them better, and again that I would have only
the white. However, when he had selected all the
white, and I had placed a few of them according to
my fancy, I told him (rising in my slipper) he might
crown me with the remainder. The splendour of my
apparel gave me a sensation of authority. Soon as
the flowers had taken their station on my head, I
expressed a dignified satisfaction at the taste displayed
by my father, just as if I could have seen how they
appeared ! But he knew that there was at least as
much pleasure as pride in it, and perhaps we divided
the latter (alas ! not both) pretty equally. He now
took me into the market-place, where a concourse of
people was waiting for the purchase of slaves. Mer-
chants came and looked at me ; some commending,
others disparaging ; but all agreeing that I was
slender and delicate, that I could not live long, and
that I should give much trouble. Many would have
bought the chlamys, but there was something less
saleable in the child and flowers.

Aesop. Had thy features been coarse and thy
572



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



voice rustic, they would all have patted thy cheeks
and found no fault in thee.

Rbodope. As it was, every one had bought exactly
such another in time past, and been a loser by it.
At these speeches I perceived the flowers tremble
slightly on my bosom, from my father's agitation.
Although he scoffed at them, knowing my healthiness,
he was troubled internally, and said many short
prayers, not very unlike imprecations, turning his
head aside. Proud was I, prouder than ever, when at
last several talents were offered for me, and by the
very man who in the beginning had undervalued me
the most, and prophesied the worst of me. My father
scowled at him, and refused the money. I thought he
was playing a game, and began to wonder what it
could be, since I never had seen it played before.
Then I fancied it might be some celebration because
plenty had returned to the city, insomuch that my
father had bartered the last of the corn he hoarded.
I grew more and more delighted at the sport. But
soon there advanced an elderly man, who said gravely,
' Thou hast stolen this child : her vesture alone is
worth above a hundred drachmas. Carry her home
again to her parents, and do it directly, or Nemesis
and the Eumenides will overtake thee.' Knowing the
estimation in which my father had always been holden
by his fellow citizens, I laughed again, and pinched
his ear. He, although naturally choleric, burst forth
into no resentment at these reproaches, but said
calmly, ' I think I know thee by name, O guest !
Surely thou art Xanthus the Samian. Deliver this
child from famine.'

Again I laughed aloud and heartily ; and, thinking
it was now my part of the game, I held out both my

573



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



arms and protruded my whole body toward the
stranger. He would not receive me from my father's
neck, but he asked me with benignity and solicitude
if I was hungry : at which I laughed again, and more
than ever : for it was early in the morning, soon after
the first meal, and my father had nourished me most
carefully and plentifully in all the days of the famine.
But Xanthus, waiting for no answer, took out of a sack,
which one of his slaves carried at his side, a cake of
wheaten bread and a piece of honey-comb, and gave
them to me. I held the honey-comb to my father's
mouth, thinking it the most of a dainty. He dashed
it to the ground ; but, seizing the bread, he began
to devour it ferociously. This also I thought was in
play ; and I clapped my hands at his distortions. But
Xanthus looked on him like one afraid, and smote the
cake from him, crying aloud, ' Name the price.' My
father now placed me in his arms, naming a price
much below what the other had offered, saying,
' The Gods are ever with thee, O Xanthus ! therefore
to thee do I consign my child.' But while Xanthus
was counting out the silver, my father seized the cake
again, which the slave had taken up and was about to
replace in the wallet. His hunger was exasperated by
the taste and the delay. Suddenly there arose much
tumult. Turning round in the old woman's bosom
who had received me from Xanthus, I saw my beloved
father struggling on the ground, livid and speechless.
The more violent my cries, the more rapidly they
hurried me away ; and many were soon between us.
Little was I suspicious that he had suffered the pangs
of famine long before : alas ! and he had suffered
them for me. Do I weep while I am telling you they
ended f I could not have closed his eyes ; I was too
574



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



young ; but I might have received his last breath ;
the only comfort of an orphan's bosom. Do you now
think him blameable, O Aesop I

Aesop and Rhodope

346 The Dream of ^Boccaccio

HERE in this chamber she appeared to me more
visibly in a dream.
' Thy prayers have been heard, O Giovanni,' said
she. I sprang to embrace her.

' Do not spill the water ! Ah ! you have spilt
a part of it.'

I then observed in her hand a crystal vase. A few
drops were sparkling on the sides and running down
the rim; a few were trickling from the base and from
the hand that held it.

' I must go down to the brook,' said she, ' and fill
it again as it was filled before.'

What a moment of agony was this to me ! Could
I be certain how long might be her absence? She
went : I was following : she made a sign for me to
turn back : I disobeyed her only an instant : yet my
sense of disobedience, increasing my feebleness and
confusion, made me lose sight of her. In the next
moment she was again at my side, with the cup quite
full. I stood motionless : I feared my breath might
shake the water over. I looked her in the face for her
commands — and to see it — to see it so calm, so bene-
ficent, so beautiful. I was forgetting what I had
prayed for, when she lowered her head, tasted of
the cup, and gave it me. I drank ; and suddenly
sprang forth before me, many groves and palaces and
gardens, and their statues and their avenues, and their

S75



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR

labyrinths of alaternus and bay, and alcoves of citron,
and watchful loopholes in the retirements of impene-
trable pomegranate. Farther off, just below where the
fountain slipt away from its marble hall and guardian
gods, arose, from their beds of moss and drosera and
darkest grass, the sisterhood of oleanders, fond of
tantalising with their bosomed flowers and their
moist and pouting blossoms the little shy rivulet, and
of covering its face with all the colours of the dawn.
My dream expanded and moved forward. I trod
again the dust of Posilipo, soft as the feathers in the
wings of Sleep. I emerged on Baia ; I crossed her
innumerable arches ; I loitered in the breezy sunshine
of her mole ; I trusted the faithful seclusion of her
caverns, the keepers of so many secrets ; and I reposed
on the buoyancy of her tepid sea. Then Naples and her
theatres and her churches, and grottos and dells and
forts and promontories, rushed forward in confusion,
now among soft whispers, now among sweetest sounds,
and subsided, and sank, and disappeared. Yet a
memory seemed to come fresh from every one : each
had time enough for its tale, for its pleasure, for its
reflection, for its pang. As I mounted with silent
steps the narrow staircase of the old palace, how
distinctly did I feel against the palm of my hand the
coldness of that smooth stone-work, and the greater
of the cramps of iron in it !

' Ah me ! is this forgetting ? ' cried I anxiously to
Fiammetta.

' We must recall these scenes before us,' she replied :
' such is the punishment of them. Let us hope and
believe that the apparition, and the compunction
which must follow it, will be accepted as the full
penalty, and that both will pass away almost together.'
576



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



I feared to lose anything attendant on her presence :
I feared to approach her forehead with my lips :
I feared to touch the lily on its long wavy leaf in her
hair, which filled my whole heart with fragrance.
Venerating, adoring, I bowed my head at last to kiss
her snow-white robe, and trembled at my presump-
tion. And yet the effulgence of her countenance
vivified while it chastened me. I loved her — I must
not say more than ever — better than ever ; it was
Fiammetta who had inhabited the skies. As my hand
opened toward her,

' Beware ! ' said she, faintly smiling ; ' beware,
Giovanni. Take only the crystal ; take it, and drink
again.'

' Must all be then forgotten f ' said I sorrowfully.

' Remember your prayer and mine, Giovanni !
Shall both have been granted — O how much worse
than in vain ! '

I drank instantly ; I drank largely. How cool my
bosom grew ; how could it grow so cold before her i
But it was not to remain in its quiescency ; its trials
were not yet over. I will not, Francesco ! no, I may
not commemorate the incidents she related me, nor
which of us said, ' I blush for having loved first ; '
nor which of us replied, ' Say least, say least, and blush
again.'

The charm of the words (for I felt not the encum-
brance of the body nor the acuteness of the spirit)
seemed to possess me wholly. Although the water
gave me strength and comfort, and somewhat of celes-
tial pleasure, many tears fell around the border of the
vase as she held it up before me, exhorting me to take
courage, and inviting me with more than exhortation
to accomplish my deliverance. She came nearer, more
2830 u 577



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



tenderly, more earnestly ; she held the dewy globe
with both hands, leaning forward, and sighed and shook
her head, drooping at my pusillanimity. It was only
when a ringlet had touched the rim, and perhaps the
water (for a sunbeam on the surface could never have
given it such a golden hue), that I took courage,
clasped it, and exhausted it. Sweet as was the water,
sweet as was the serenity it gave me — alas ! that also
which it moved away from me was sweet !

' This time you can trust me alone,' said she, and
parted my hair, and kissed my brow. Again she went
toward the brook : again my agitation, my weakness,
my doubt, came over me : nor could I see her while
she raised the water, nor knew I whence she drew it.
When she returned, she was close to me at once : she
smiled : her smile pierced me to the bones : it seemed
an angel's. She sprinkled the pure water on me ;
she looked most fondly ; she took my hand ; she
suffered me to press hers to my bosom ; but, whether
by design I cannot tell, she let fall a few drops of the
chilly element between.

' And now, O my beloved ! ' said she, ' we have
consigned to the bosom of God our earthly joys and
sorrows. The joys cannot return, let not the sorrows.
These alone would trouble my repose among the
blessed.'

' Trouble thy repose ! Fiammetta ! Give me the
chalice ! ' cried I — ' not a drop will I leave in it, not
a drop.'

' Take it ! ' said that soft voice. ' O now most dear
Giovanni ! I know thou hast strength enough ; and
there is but little — at the bottom lies our first kiss.'

' Mine ! didst thou say, beloved one ? and is that
left thee still ? '
578



WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR



' Mine,' said she pensively ; and as she abased her
head, the broad leaf of the lily hid her brow and her
eyes ; the light of heaven shone through the flower.

' O Fiammetta ! Fiammetta ! ' cried I in agony,
' God is the God of mercy, God is the God of love —
can I, can I ever ? ' I struck the chalice against my
head, unmindful that I held it ; the water covered
my face and my feet. I started up, not yet awake, and
I heard the name of Fiammetta in the curtains.

The Pentameron

JAMES WHITE

1775-1820

347 Davy to Justice Shallow

MASTER ABRAM is dead, gone, your Worship-
dead ! Master Abram ! Oh ! good your
Worship, a's gone. — A' never throve, since a' came
from Windsor — 'twas his death. . . A' took delight
in nothing but his book of songs and sonnets — a'
would go to the Stroud side under the large beech
tree, and sing, till 'twas quite pity of our lives to mark
him ; for his chin grew as long as a muscle. . . A' died,
your Worship, just about one, at the crow of the cock.
— I thought how it was with him ; for a' talk'd as
quick, aye, marry, as glib as your Worship ; and
a' smiled, and look'd at his own nose, and call'd
' Sweet Ann Page '. I ask'd him if a' would eat — so
a' bad us commend him to his Cousin Robert (a' never
call'd your Worship so before) and bade us get hot
meat, for a' would not say nay to Ann again. — But
a' never liv'd to touch it — a' began all in a moment to
sing ' Lovers all, a Madrigal '. 'Twas the only song
Master Abram ever learnt out of book, and clean by

579



JAMES WHITE

heart, your Worship — and so a' sung, and smiled, and
look'd askew at his own nose, and sung, and sung on,
till his breath waxed shorter, and shorter, and shorter,
and a' fell into a struggle and died. I beseech your
Worship to think he was well tended — I look'd to
him, your Worship, late and soon, and crept at his
heel all day long, an it had been any fallow dog — but
I thought a' could never live, for a' did so sing, and
then a' never drank with it — I knew 'twas a bad sign —
yea, a' sung, your Worship, marry, without drinking
a drop.

Alice Shortcake craves, she may make his shroud. —
Ah ! had your Worship but never ha' taken him to
Windsor !

Falstajf Letters

HENRY, LORD BROUGHAM

1778-1868

348 ^Political Second-Sight

IT was in truth a crisis to try men's souls. For
a while all was uncertainty and consternation ; all
were seen fluttering about like birds in an eclipse or
a thunderstorm ; no man could tell whom he might
trust ; nay, worse still, no man could tell of whom he
might ask anything. It was hard to say, not who were in
office, but who were likely to remain in office. All true
Scots were in dismay and distraction. It might truly
be said they knew not which way to look, or whither
to turn. Perhaps it might be yet more truly said, that
they knew not when to turn. But such a crisis was
too sharp to last ; it passed away ; and then was to
be seen a proof of Mr. Dundas's power amongst his
countrymen, which transcended all expectation, and
580



HENRY, LORD BROUGHAM

almost surpassed belief, if indeed it is not rather to
be viewed as an evidence of the acute foresight —
the political second -sight — of the Scottish nation.
The trusty band in both Houses actually were found
adhering to him against the existing Government ;
nay, he held the proxies of many Scottish Peers in
open opposition ! Well might his colleague exclaim
to the hapless Addington in such unheard-of troubles,
' Doctor, the Thanes fly from us.' When the very
Scotch Peers wavered — and when the Grampian hills
might next be expected to move about — it was time to
think that the end of all things was at hand ; and the
return of Pitt and security, and patronage and Dundas,
speedily ensued to bless old Scotland, and reward her
providence, or her fidelity — her attachment at once
to her patron — and to herself.

Historical Sketches : Mr. Dundas

WILLIAM HAZLITT

i 778-1830

249 On Qoing a yourney

ONE of the pleasantest things in the world is going
a journey ; but I like to go by myself. I can
enjoy society in a room ; but out of doors, nature is
company enough for me. I am then never less alone
than when alone.

The fields his study, nature was his book.

I cannot see the wit of walking and talking at the
same time. When I am in the country I wish to
vegetate like the country. I am not for criticising
hedge-rows and black cattle. I go out of town in order
to forget the town and all that is in it. There are

581



WILLIAM HAZLITT



those who for this purpose go to watering-places, and
carry the metropolis with them. I like more elbow-
room and fewer encumbrances. I like solitude, when
I give myself up to it, for the sake of solitude ; nor do
I ask for

a friend in my retreat,
Whom I may whisper solitude is sweet.

The soul of a journey is liberty, perfect liberty, to
think, feel, do, just as one pleases. We go a journey
chiefly to be free of all impediments and of all in-
conveniences ; to leave ourselves behind, much more
to get rid of others. It is because I want a little
breathing-space to muse on indifferent matters, where
Contemplation

May plume her feathers and let grow her wings,

That in the various bustle of resort

Were all too ruffled, and sometimes impair'd,

that I absent myself from the town for a while, without
feeling at a loss the moment I am left by myself.
Instead of a friend in a postchaise or in a Tilbury, to
exchange good things with, and vary the same stale
topics over again, for once let me have a truce with
impertinence. Give me the clear blue sky over my
head, and the green turf beneath my feet, a winding
road before me, and a three hours' march to dinner —
and then to thinking ! It is hard if I cannot start
some game on these lone heaths. I laugh, I run, I
leap, I sing for joy. From the point of yonder rolling
cloud I plunge into my past being, and revel there, as
the sun-burnt Indian plunges headlong into the wave
that wafts him to his native shore. Then long-
forgotten things, like ' sunken wrack and sumless
treasuries,' burst upon my eager sight, and I begin
to feel, think, and be myself again. Instead of an
582



WILLIAM HAZLITT



awkward silence, broken by attempts at wit or dull
common-places, mine is that undisturbed silence of
the heart which alone is perfect eloquence. No one
likes puns, alliterations, antitheses, argument, and
analysis better than I do ; but I sometimes had rather
be without them. ' Leave, oh, leave me to my
repose ! ' I have just now other business in hand,
which would seem idle to you, but is with me ' very
stuff o' the conscience.' Is not this wild rose sweet
without a comment ? Does not this daisy leap to my
heart set in its coat of emerald ?

Table-Talk

350 The Spirit of Humanity in Shakespeare

AS good an example as any of this informing and
Jix. redeeming power in our author's genius might
be taken from the comic scenes in both parts of
Henry IV. Nothing can go much lower in intellect
or morals than many of the characters. Here are
knaves and fools in abundance, of the meanest order,
and stripped stark-naked. But genius, like charity,
' covers a multitude of sins ' ; we pity as much as wc
despise them ; in spite of our disgust we like them,
because they like themselves, and because we are
made to sympathize with them ; and the ligament,
fine as it is, which links them to humanity, is never
broken. Who would quarrel with Wart, or Feeble, or
Mouldy, or Bull-calf, or even with Pistol, Nym, or
Bardolphf None but a hypocrite. The severe
censurers of the morals of imaginary characters can
generally find a hole for their own vices to creep out
at, and yet do not perceive how it is that the imperfect
and even deformed characters in Shakespeare's plays,

S83



WILLIAM HAZLITT

as done to the life, by forming a part of our personal
consciousness, claim our personal forgiveness, and sus-
pend or evade our moral judgement, by bribing our
self-love to side with them. Not to do so, is not
morality, but affectation, stupidity, or ill-nature.
I have more sympathy with one of Shakespeare's pick-
purses, Gadshill or Peto, than I can possibly have with
any member of the Society for the Suppression of
Vice, and would by no means assist to deliver the one
into the hands of the other. Those who cannot be
persuaded to draw a veil over the foibles of ideal
characters, may be suspected of wearing a mask over
their own ! Again, in point of understanding and
attainments, Shallow sinks low enough ; and yet his
cousin Silence is a foil to him ; he is the shadow of
a shade, glimmers on the very verge of downright
imbecility, and totters on the brink of nothing. ' He
has been merry twice and once ere now,' and is hardly
persuaded to break his silence in a song. Shallow has
' heard the chimes at midnight,' and roared out glees
and catches at taverns and inns of court, when he was
young. So, at least, he tells his cousin Silence, and
Falstaff encourages the loftiness of his pretensions.
Shallow would be thought a great man among his
dependants and followers ; Silence is nobody — not
even in his own opinion ; yet he sits in the orchard,
and eats his caraways and pippins among the rest.
Shakespeare takes up the meanest subjects with the
same tenderness that we do an insect's wing, and would
not kill a fly.

Comic Writers



584



WILLIAM HAZLITT



351 'The Pleasures of fading

THE last time I tasted this luxury in its full per-
fection was one day after a sultry day's walk in
summer between Farnham and Alton. I was fairly
tired out ; I walked into an inn-yard (I think at the
latter place) ; I was shown by the waiter to what
looked at first like common outhouses at the other end
of it, but they turned out to be a suite of rooms,
probably a hundred years old — the one I entered
opened into an old-fashioned garden, embellished
with beds of larkspur and a leaden Mercury ; it
was wainscoted, and there was a grave-looking, dark-
coloured portrait of Charles II hanging up over the tiled
chimneypiece. I had Love for Love in my pocket, and
began to read ; coffee was brought in in a silver
coffee-pot ; the cream, the bread and butter, every
thing was excellent, and the flavour of Congreve's
style prevailed over all. I prolonged the entertain-
ment till a late hour, and relished this divine comedy
better even than when I used to see it played by
Miss Mellon, as Miss Prue ; Bob Palmer, as Tattle ;
and Bannister, as honest Ben. This circumstance
happened just five years ago, and it seems like yesterday.
If I count my life so by lustres, it will soon glide away ;
yet I shall not have to repine, if, while it lasts, it is
enriched with a few such recollections !

The Plain Speaker

352 "John Q,avanagh

I ~\IED at bis house in Burbage Street, St. Giles's,
John Cavanagh, the famous hand, jives-player.
When a person dies who does any one thing better
than any one else in the world, which so many others

5»S



WILLIAM HAZLITT



are trying to do well, it leaves a gap in society. It is
not likely that any one will now see the game of fives
played in its perfection for many years to come —
for Cavanagh is dead, and has not left his peer behind
him.

It may be said that there are things of more
importance than striking a ball against a wall — there
are things, indeed, that make more noise and do as
little good, such as making war and peace, making
speeches and answering them, making verses and blot-
ting them, making money and throwing it away. But
the game of fives is what no one despises who has ever
played at it. It is the finest exercise for the body,
and the best relaxation for the mind. The Roman
poet said that ' Care mounted behind the horseman
and stuck to his skirts '. But this remark would not
have applied to the fives-player. He who takes to
playing at fives is twice young. He feels neither the
past nor future ' in the instant '. Debts, taxes,
' domestic treason, foreign levy, nothing can touch
him further.' He has no other wish, no other thought,
from the moment the game begins, but that of striking
the ball, of placing it, of making it ! This Cavanagh
was sure to do. Whenever he touched the ball there
was an end of the chase. His eye was certain, his hand
fatal, his presence of mind complete. He could do
what he pleased, and he always knew exactly what to
do. He saw the whole game, and played it ; took
instant advantage of his adversary's weakness, and
recovered balls, as if by a miracle and from sudden
thought, that every one gave for lost. He had equal
power and skill, quickness, and judgement. He could
either outwit his antagonist by finesse, or beat him
by main strength. Sometimes, when he seemed
586



WILLIAM HAZLITT

preparing to send the ball with the full swing of his
arm, he would by a slight turn of his wrist drop it
within an inch of the line. In general, the ball came
from his hand, as if from a racket, in a straight, hori-
zontal line ; so that it was in vain to attempt to over-
take or stop it. As it was said of a great orator that
he never was at a loss for a word, and for the properest
word, so Cavanagh always could tell the degree of
force necessary to be given to a ball, and the precise
direction in which it should be sent. He did his work
with the greatest ease ; never took more pains than
was necessary ; and, while others were fagging them-
selves to death, was as cool and collected as if he had
just entered the court. His style of play was as
remarkable as his power of execution. He had no
affectation, no trifling. He did not throw away the
game to show off an attitude or try an experiment.
He was a fine, sensible, manly player, who did what he
could, but that was more than any one else could even
affect to do. His blows were not undecided and
ineffectual — lumbering like Mr. Wordsworth's epic
poetry, nor wavering like Mr. Coleridge's lyric prose,
nor short of the mark like Mr. Brougham's speeches,
nor wide of it like Mr. Canning's wit, nor foul like the
Quarterly, nor let balls like the Edinburgh Review.
Cobbett and Junius together would have made a
Cavanagh. He was the best vp-hill player in the world ;
even when his adversary was fourteen he would play
on the same or better, and as he never flung away the
game through carelessness and conceit, he never gave
it up through laziness or want of heart. The only
peculiarity of his play was that he never volleyed.,
but let the balls hop ; but if they rose an inch from
the ground he never missed having them. There was

S»7



WILLIAM HAZLITT



not only nobody equal, but nobody second to him.
It is supposed that he could give any other player half
the game, or beat them with his left hand. . .

Cavanagh was an Irishman by birth, and a house-
painter by profession. He had once laid aside his
working-dress, and walked up, in his smartest clothes,
to the Rosemary Branch to have an afternoon's
pleasure. A person accosted him, and asked him if
he would have a game. So they agreed to play
for half a crown a game and a bottle of cider.
The first game began — it was seven, eight, ten,
thirteen, fourteen, all. Cavanagh won it. The next
was the same. They played on, and each game was
hardly contested. ' There,' said the unconscious fives-
player, ' there was a stroke that Cavanagh could not
take : I never played better in my life, and yet I can't
win a game. I don't know how it is ! ' However,
they played on, Cavanagh winning every game, and
the bystanders drinking the cider and laughing all the
time. In the twelfth game, when Cavanagh was only
four, and the stranger thirteen, a person came in and
said, ' What ! are you here, Cavanagh ? ' The words
were no sooner pronounced than the astonished player
let the ball drop from his hand, and saying, ' What !
have I been breaking my heart all this time to beat
Cavanagh ? ' refused to make another effort. ' And
yet, I give you my word,' said Cavanagh, telling the
story with some triumph, ' I played all the while with
my clenched fist.' . .

He could not have shown himself in any ground in
England but he would havebeenimmediatelysurround-
ed with inquisitive gazers, trying to find out in what
part of his frame his unrivalled skill lay, as politicians
wonder to see the balance of Europe suspended in
588



WILLIAM HAZLITT

Lord Castlereagh's face, and admire the trophies of
the British Navy lurking under Mr. Croker's hanging
brow. Now Cavanagh was as good-looking a man as
the noble Lord, and much better looking than the
Right Hon. Secretary. He had a clear, open coun-
tenance, and did not look sideways or down, like
Mr. Murray the bookseller. He was a young fellow
of sense, humour, and courage. He once had a quarrel
with a waterman at Hungerford Stairs, and, they say,
served him out in great style. In a word, there are
hundreds at this day who cannot mention his name
without admiration, as the best fives-player that
perhaps ever lived (the greatest excellence of which
they have any notion) ; and the noisy shout of the
ring happily stood him in stead of the unheard voice
of posterity ! . . We have paid this willing tribute to
his memory.

Let no rude hand deface it
And his forlorn ' Hie Jacet '.

Table -Talk

JANE TAYLOR

1783-1824

353 Toung Ladfs Education

WELL ! . . my education is at last finished :
indeed it would be strange, if, after five years'
hard application, anything were left incomplete.
Happily that is all over now ; and I have nothing to
do, but to exercise my various accomplishments.

Let me see ! — as to French, I am mistress of that,
and speak it, if possible, with more fluency than
English. Italian I can read with ease, and pronounce
very well : as well, at least, and better, than any of
my friends ; and that is all one need wish for in

589



JANE TAYLOR

Italian. Music I have learned till I am perfectly sick
of it. But, now that we have a grand piano, it will
be delightful to play when we have company. I must
still continue to practise a little ; — the only thing,
I think, that I need now to improve myself in. And
then there are my Italian songs ! which everybody
allows I sing with taste, and as it is what so few
people can pretend to, I am particularly glad that
I can.

My drawings are universally admired ; especially
the shells and flowers ; which are beautiful, certainly ;
besides this, I have a decided taste in all kinds of fancy
ornaments.

And then my dancing and waltzing ! in which our
master himself owned that he could take me no
farther ! — just the figure for it certainly ; it would be
unpardonable if I did not excel.

As to common things, geography, and history, and
poetry, and philosophy, thank my stars, I have got
through them all ! so that I may consider myself
not only perfectly accomplished, but also thoroughly
well-informed.

Well, to be sure, how much have I fagged through — ;
the only wonder is that one head can contain it all.

Contributions of Q Q.

WASHINGTON IRVING

1783-1859

354 The Stage Qoach

IN the course of a December tour in Yorkshire,
I rode for a long distance in one of the public
coaches, on the day preceding Christmas. The coach
was crowded, both inside and out, with passengers,
59°



WASHINGTON IRVING

who, by their talk, seemed principally bound to the
mansions of relations or friends, to eat the Christmas
dinner. It was loaded also with hampers of game,
and baskets and boxes of delicacies ; and hares hung
dangling their long ears about the coachman's box,
presents from distant friends for the impending feast.
I had three fine rosy-cheeked school-boys for my
fellow-passengers inside, full of the buxom health and
manly spirit which I have observed in the children
of this country. They were returning home for the
holidays in high glee, and promising themselves
a world of enjoyment. It was delightful to hear the
gigantic plans of the little rogues, and the impracticable
feats they were to perform during their six weeks'
emancipation from the abhorred thraldom of book,
birch, and pedagogue. They were full of anticipations
of the meeting with the family and household, down
to the very cat and dog ; and of the joy they were
to give their little sisters by the presents with which
their pockets were crammed ; but the meeting to
which they seemed to look forward with the greatest
impatience was with Bantam, which I found to be
a pony, and according to their talk, possessed of more
virtues than any steed since the days of Bucephalus.
How he could trot ! how he could run ! and then
such leaps as he would take — there was not a hedge
in the whole country that he could not clear.

They were under the particular guardianship of
the coachman, to whom, whenever an opportunity
presented, they addressed a host of questions, and
pronounced him one of the best fellows in the world.
Indeed, I could not but notice the more than ordinary
air of bustle and importance of the coachman, who
wore his hat a little on one side, and had a large bunch

591



WASHINGTON IRVING



of Christmas greens stuck in the buttonhole of his
coat. He is always a personage full of mighty care
and business, but he is particularly so during this
season, having so many commissions to execute in
consequence of the great interchange of presents. . .

Perhaps it might be owing to the pleasing serenity
that reigned in my own mind, that I fancied I saw
cheerfulness in every countenance throughout the
journey. A stage coach, however, carries animation
always with it, and puts the world in motion as it
whirls along. The horn, sounded at the entrance of
a village, produces a general bustle. Some hasten
forth to meet friends ; some with bundles and band-
boxes to secure places, and in the hurry of the moment
can hardly take leave of the group that accompanies
them. In the meantime the coachman has a world
of , small commissions to execute. Sometimes he
delivers a hare or pheasant ; sometimes jerks a small
parcel or newspaper to the door of a public-house ;
and sometimes, with knowing leer and words of sly
import, hands to some half-blushing, half-laughing
housemaid an odd-shaped billet doux from some rustic
admirer. As the coach rattles through the village,
every one runs to the window, and you have glances
on every side of fresh country faces and blooming
giggling girls. At the corners are assembled juntos
of village idlers and wise men, who take their stations
there for the important purpose of seeing company
pass ; but the sagest knot is generally at the black-
smith's, to whom the passing of the coach is an event
fruitful of much speculation.

The Sketch Book



59*



WASHINGTON IRVING



355 Duke Domum

WE had passed for some time along the wall of
a park, and at length the chaise stopped at the
gate. It was in a heavy magnificent old style, of iron
bars, fancifully wrought at top into flourishes and
flowers. The huge square columns that supported
the gate were surmounted by the family crest. Close
adjoining was the porter's lodge, sheltered under dark
fir-trees, and almost buried in shrubbery.

The postboy rang a large porter's bell, which re-
sounded through the still, frosty air, and was answered
by the distant barking of dogs, with which the mansion-
house seemed garrisoned. An old woman immediately
appeared at the gate. As the moonlight fell strongly
upon her, I had a full view of a little primitive dame,
dressed very much in the antique taste, with a neat
kerchief and stomacher, and her silver hair peeping
from under a cap of snowy whiteness. She came
curtseying forth, with many expressions of simple joy
at seeing her young master. Her husband, it seemed,
was up at the house keeping Christmas eve in the
servants' hall ; they could not do without him, as
he was the best hand at a song and story in the house-
hold.

My friend proposed that we should alight and walk
through the park to the hall, which was at no great
distance, while the chaise should follow on. Our
road wound through a noble avenue of trees, among
the naked branches of which the moon glittered as
she rolled through the deep vault of a cloudless sky.
The lawn beyond was sheeted with a slight covering
of snow, which here and there sparkled as the moon-
beams caught a frosty crystal ; and at a distance might

593



WASHINGTON IRVING



be seen a thin transparent vapour, stealing up from
the low grounds and threatening gradually to shroud
the landscape.

My companion looked around him with transport : —
' How often,' said he, ' have I scampered up this
avenue, on returning home on school vacations ! How
often have I played under these trees when a boy !
I feel a degree of filial reverence for them, as we look
up to those who have cherished us in childhood. My
father was always scrupulous in exacting our holidays,
and having us around him on family festivals. He
used to direct and superintend our games with the
strictness that some parents do the studies of their
children. He was very particular that we should play
the old English games according to their original
form ; and consulted old books for precedent and
authority for every " merrie disport " ; yet I assure
you there never was pedantry so delightful. It was
the policy of the good old gentleman to make his
children feel that home was the happiest place in the
world ; and I value this delicious home-feeling as
one of the choicest gifts a parent could bestow.'

We were interrupted by the clamour of a troop of
dogs of all sorts and sizes, ' mongrel, puppy, whelp and
hound, and curs of low degree,' that, disturbed by
the ring of the porter's bell, and the rattling of the
chaise, came bounding, open-mouthed, across the lawn.

' The little dogs and all,

Tray, Blanch, and Sweetheart — see, they bark at me ! '
cried Bracebridge, laughing. At the sound of his
voice, the bark was changed into a yelp of delight,
and in a moment he was surrounded and almost
overpowered by the caresses of the faithful animals.

The Sketch Book

594



WASHINGTON IRVING



356 Little 'Britain

BUT though thus fallen into decline, Little
Britain still bears traces of its former splendour.
There are several houses ready to tumble down, the
fronts of which are magnificently enriched with old
oaken carvings of hideous faces, unknown birds, beasts,
and fishes ; and fruits and flowers which it would
perplex a naturalist to classify. There are also, in
Aldersgate Street, certain remains of what were once
spacious and lordly family mansions, but which have
in latter days been subdivided into several tenements.
Here may often be found the family of a petty trades-
man, with its trumpery furniture, burrowing among the
relics of antiquated finery, in great rambling time-
stained apartments, with fretted ceilings, gilded
cornices, and enormous marble fireplaces. The lanes
and courts also contain many smaller houses, not on so
grand a scale, but, like your small ancient gentry,
sturdily maintaining their claims to equal antiquity.
These have their gable-ends to the street ; great bow
windows, with diamond panes set in lead, grotesque
carvings, and low arched doorways. . .

Little Britain may truly be called the heart's core
of the City ; the stronghold of true John Bulhsm. It
is a fragment of London as it was in its better days,
with its antiquated folks and fashions. Here flourish
in great preservation many of the holiday games and
customs of yore. The inhabitants most religiously
eat pancakes on Shrove Tuesday, hot-cross buns on
Good Friday, and roast goose at Michaelmas ; they
send love-letters on Valentine's Day, burn the Pope
on the fifth of November, and kiss all the girls under
the mistletoe at Christmas. Roast beef and plum

595



WASHINGTON IRVING



pudding are also held in superstitious veneration, and
port and sherry maintain their grounds as the only
true English wines ; all others being considered vile
outlandish beverages.

The Sketch Book

357 ^Poets' Qorner

I PASSED some time in Poets' Corner, which
occupies an end of one of the transepts or cross
aisles of the abbey. The monuments are generally
simple ; for the lives of literary men afford no striking
themes for the sculptor. Shakespeare and Addison
have statues erected to their memories ; but the greater
part have busts, medallions, and sometimes mere
inscriptions. Notwithstanding the simplicity of these
memorials, I have always observed that the visitors
to the abbey remained longest about them. A kinder
and fonder feeling takes place of that cold curiosity or
vague admiration with which they gaze on the splendid
monuments of the great and the heroic. They linger
about these as about the tombs of friends and com-
panions ; for indeed there is something of companion-
ship between the author and the reader. Other men
are known to posterity only through the medium of
history, which is continually growing faint and
obscure ; but the intercourse between the author
and his fellow men is ever new, active, and immediate.
He has lived for them more than for himself ; he has
sacrificed surrounding enjoyments, and shut himself
up from the delights of social life, that he might the
more intimately commune with distant minds and
distant ages. Well may the world cherish his renown ;
for it has been purchased, not by deeds of violence
and blood, but by the diligent dispensation of pleasure.
50



WASHINGTON IRVING



Well may posterity be grateful to his memory ; for
he has left it an inheritance, not of empty names and
sounding actions, but whole treasures of wisdom, bright
gems of thought, and golden veins of language.

The Sketch Book

LEIGH HUNT

1784-1859

358 His Prison

THE doctor then proposed that I should be removed
into the prison infirmary ; and this proposal was
granted. Infirmary had, I confess, an awkward sound,
even to my ears. I fancied a room shared with other
sick persons, not the best fitted for companions ; but
the good-natured doctor (his name was Dixon) un-
deceived me. The infirmary was divided into four
wards, with as many small rooms attached to them.
The two upper wards were occupied, but the two
on the floor had never been used : and one of these,
not very providently (for I had not yet learned to
think of money) I turned into a noble room. I papered
the walls with a trellis of roses ; I had the ceiling
coloured with clouds and sky ; the barred windows
I screened with Venetian blinds ; and when my
bookcases were set up with their busts, and flowers
and a pianoforte made their appearance, perhaps there
was not a handsomer room on that side the water.
I took a pleasure, when a stranger knocked at the door,
to see him come in and stare about him. The surprise
on issuing from the Borough, and passing through
avenues of a gaol, was dramatic. Charles Lamb
declared there was no other such room, except in
a fairy tale.

597



LEIGH HUNT

But I possessed another surprise ; which was a
garden. There was a little yard outside the room,
railed off from another belonging to the neighbouring
ward. This yard I shut in with green palings, adorned
it with a trellis, bordered it with a thick bed of earth
from a nursery, and even contrived to have a grass-
plot. The earth I filled with flowers and young trees.
There was an apple-tree, from which we managed
to get a pudding the second year. As to my flowers,
they were allowed to be perfect. Thomas Moore,
who came to see me with Lord Byron, told me he had
seen no such heart's-ease. I bought the Parnaso
Italiano while in prison, and used often to think of
a passage in it, while looking at this miniature piece of
horticulture : —

Mio picciol orto,
A me 3ci vigna, e campo, e selva, e prato. — Baldi.

My little garden,
To me thou'rt vineyard, field, and meadow, and wood.

Here I wrote and read in fine weather, sometimes
under an awning. In autumn, my trellises were hung
with scarlet-runners, which added to the flowery
investment. I used to shut my eyes in my arm-chair,
and affect to think myself hundreds of miles off.

But my triumph was in issuing forth of a morning.
A wicket out of the garden led into the large one
belonging to the prison. The latter was only for
vegetables ; but it contained a cherry tree, which
I saw twice in blossom. I parcelled out the ground
in my imagination into favourite districts. I made
a point of dressing myself as if for a long walk ; and
then, putting on my gloves, and taking my book under
my arm, stepped forth, requesting my wife not to
wait dinner if I was too late. My eldest little boy, to
whom Lamb addressed some charming verses on the
598



LEIGH HUNT



occasion, was my constant companion, and we used to
play all sorts of juvenile games together. It was,
probably, in dreaming of one of these games (but the
words had a more touching effect on my ear) that he
exclaimed one night in his sleep, ' No : I'm not lost ;
I'm found.' Neither he nor I were very strong at
that time ; but I have lived to see him a man of eight
and forty ; and wherever he is found, a generous hand
and a great understanding will be found together.

Autobiography

359 Furze on Wimbledon Qommon

THERE is an advertisement in the papers announc-
ing a building project at Wimbledon and Westhill.
The houses are to occupy a portion of Wimbledon
Park ; and boards are put among the trees by the
roadside, boasting of the ' fine frontage '. Well may
they boast of it, especially at this season of the year.
It is a golden undulation ; a foreground, and from
some points of view, a middle distance, fit to make
the richest painter despair ; a veritable Field of Cloth
of Gold. Morning (Aurora, the golden goddess), when
the dawn is of a fineness to match, must look beauty
for beauty on it. Sunset is divine. The gold goes
stretching away in the distance towards the dark trees,
like the rich evening of a poetic life. No wonder
Linnaeus, when he came to England and first beheld
this glorious shrub in bloom, fell down on his knees
and thanked God that he had lived to see it. . . As to
figures in the landscape, they are not many, nor
discordant ; such as a horse or two, a few cattle, now
and then a horseman, or a sturdy peasant on foot, or
a beauty in a barouche. Sometimes the peasant is
aged, but hale ; or sturdy, though but a child ; signs

599



LEIGH HUNT



both of good air, and prosperity, and a true country
spot. I hardly know which is the more picturesque
sight — a fine ruddy-cheeked little peasant boy, not
beyond childhood, coming along with a wheelbarrow
full of this golden furze, his face looking like a bud
a-top of it ; or a bent, hearty, old man (bent with
age, not with his perquisite) carrying off a bunch of
it on his back, as if he triumphed over time and youth.

Table-Talk

JOHN WILSON (' CHRISTOPHER
NORTH ')

1785-1854

360 Our Qountry

NORTH. Yes, James, that is our country — not
where we have breathed alone ; not that land
which we have loved, because it has shown to our
opening eyes the brightness of heaven, and the glad-
ness of earth ; but the land for which we have hoped
and feared, — that is to say, for which our bosom has
beat with the consenting hopes and fears of many
million hearts ; that land, of which we have loved
the mighty living and the mighty dead ; that land,
the Roman and the Greek would have said, where
the boy had sung in the pomp that led the sacrifice
to the altars of the ancient deities of the soil.

Shepherd. And therefore, when a man, he would
guard them frae profanation, and had he a thousan'
lives, would pour them a' out for sake o' what some
micht ca' superstition, but which you and me, and
Southside, sittin there wi' his great grey een, would
fearna, in the face o' heaven, to ca' religion.

Nodes Ambrosianae 1835

600



THOMAS DE QUINCEY

1785-1859

361 <tA London Waif

TOWARDS nightfall I went down to Greek Street,
and found, on taking possession of my new
quarters, that the house already contained one single
inmate, — a poor, friendless child, apparently ten years
old ; but she seemed hunger-bitten ; and sufferings
of that sort often make children look older than they
are. From this forlorn child I learned that she had
slept and lived there alone for some time before I
came ; and great joy the poor creature expressed when
she found that I was in future to be her companion
through the hours of darkness. The house could hardly
be called large — that is, it was not large on each
separate storey ; but, having four storeys in all, it
was large enough to impress vividly the sense of its
echoing loneliness ; and, from the want of furniture,
the noise of the rats made a prodigious uproar on the
staircase and hall ; so that, amidst the real fleshly ills
of cold and hunger, the forsaken child had found
leisure to suffer still more from the self-created one
of ghosts. Against these enemies I could promise
her protection ; human companionship was in itself
protection ; but of other and more needful aid I had,
alas ! little to offer. We lay upon the floor, with
a bundle of law-papers for a pillow, but with no other
covering than a large horseman's cloak ; afterwards,
however, we discovered in a garret an old sofa-cover,
a small piece of rug, and some fragments of other
articles, which added a little to our comfort. The poor
child crept close to me for warmth, and for security
against her ghostly enemies. When I was not more
than usually ill, I took her into my arms, so that, in

6oi



THOMAS DE QUINCEY



general, she was tolerably warm, and often slept when
I could not. . .

Whether this child were an illegitimate daughter of
Mr. Brunell, or only a servant, I could not ascertain ;
she did not herself know ; but certainly she was treated
altogether as a menial servant. No sooner did Mr.
Brunell make his appearance than she went below-
stairs, brushed his shoes, coat, &c. ; and, except when
she was summoned to run upon some errand, she never
emerged from the dismal Tartarus of the kitchens to
the upper air until my welcome knock towards nightfall
called up her little trembling footsteps to the front-
door. Of her life during the daytime, however, I knew
little but what I gathered from her own account at
night ; for, as soon as the hours of business commenced,
I saw that my absence would be acceptable ; and,
in general, therefore, I went off and sat in the parks
or elsewhere until the approach of twilight.

Confessions of an Opium-Eater

362 5\j?mr of Talavera

AS we stayed for three or four minutes, I alighted,
X\. and immediately from a dismantled stall in the
street, where no doubt she had been presiding through
the earlier part of the night, advanced eagerly a middle-
aged woman. The sight of my newspaper it was that
had drawn her attention upon myself. The victory
which we were carrying down to the provinces on
thts occasion, was the imperfect one of Talavera —
imperfect for its results, such was the virtual treachery
of the Spanish general, Cuesta, but not imperfect in
its ever-memorable heroism. I told her the main
outline of the battle. The agitation of her enthusiasm
602



THOMAS DE QUINCEY

had been so conspicuous when listening, and when
first applying for information, that I could not but
ask her if she had not some relative in the Peninsular
army. Oh, yes ; her only son was there. In what
regiment? He was a trooper in the 23rd Dragoons.
My heart sank within me as she made that answer.

This sublime regiment, which an Englishman should
never mention without raising his hat to their memory,
had made the most memorable and effective charge
recorded in military annals. They leaped their horses
— over a trench where they could, into it, and with
the result of death or mutilation where they could
not. What proportion cleared the trench is no-
where stated. Those who did, closed up and went
down upon the enemy with such divinity of fervour
(I use the word divinity by design : the inspiration of
God must have prompted this movement to those
whom even then He was calling to His presence),
that two results followed. As regarded the enemy,
this 23 rd Dragoons, not, I believe, originally three
hundred and fifty strong, paralysed a French column,
six thousand strong, then ascended the hill, and fixed
the gaze of the whole French army. As regarded
themselves, the 23rd were supposed at first to have
been barely not annihilated ; but eventually, I believe,
about one in four survived. And this, then, was
the regiment — a regiment already for some hours
glorified and hallowed to the ear of all London . . .
in which the young trooper served whose mother was
now talking in a spirit of such joyous enthusiasm. Did
I tell her the truth ? Had I the heart to break up her
dreams ? No. To-morrow, said I to myself — to-
morrow, or the next day, will publish the worst. For
one night more, wherefore should she not sleep in

603



THOMAS DE QUINCEY

peace ? After to-morrow, the chances are too many
that peace will forsake her pillow. This brief respite,
then, let her owe to my gift and my forbearance. But,
if I told her not of the bloody price that had been
paid, not, therefore, was I silent on the contributions
from her son's regiment to that day's service and glory.
I showed her not the funeral banners under which the
noble regiment was sleeping. I lifted not the over-
shadowing laurels from the bloody trench in which
horse and rider lay mangled together. But I told her
how these dear children of England, officers and
privates, had leaped their horses over all obstacles as
gaily as hunters to the morning's chase. I told her how
they rode their horses into the mists of death (saying
to myself, but not saying to her), and laid down their
young lives for thee, O mother England ! as willingly —
poured out their noble blood as cheerfully — as ever,
after a long day's sport, when infants, they had rested
their wearied heads upon their mother's knees, or
had sunk to sleep in her arms.

Strange it is, yet true, that she seemed to have
no fears for her son's safety, even after this know-
ledge that the 23rd Dragoons had been memorably
engaged ; but so much was she enraptured by
the knowledge that his regiment, and therefore that
he, had rendered conspicuous service in the dread-
ful conflict — a service which had actually made
them, within the last twelve hours, the foremost
topic of conversation in London — so absolutely was
fear swallowed up in joy — that, in the mere simplicity
of her fervent nature, the poor woman threw her arms
round my neck, as she thought of her son, and gave
to me the kiss which secretly was meant for him.

The English Mail-Coach

604



THOMAS DE QUINCEY



363 Our Ladies of Sorrow

' ' I 'HESE are the Sorrows ; and they are three in
JL number, as the Graces are three, who dress man's
life with beauty ; the Parcae are three, who weave
the dark arras of man's life in their mysterious loom
always with colours sad in part, sometimes angry with
tragic crimson and black ; the Furies are three, who
visit with retributions called from the other side of
the grave offences that walk upon this ; and once even
the Muses were but three, who fit the harp, the
trumpet, or the lute, to the great burdens of man's
impassioned creations. These are the Sorrows, all
three of whom I know.' The last words I say now ;
but in Oxford I said — ' one of whom I know, and the
others too surely I shall know '. For already, in my
fervent youth, I saw (dimly relieved upon the dark
background of my dreams) the imperfect lineaments
of the awful sisters. . .

The eldest of the three is named Mater Lachry-
marum, Our Lady of Tears. She it is that night and
day raves and moans, calling for vanished faces. She
stood in Rama, when a voice was heard of lamentation
— Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to
be comforted. She it was that stood in Bethlehem on
the night when Herod's sword swept its nurseries of
Innocents and the little feet were stiffened for ever,
which heard at times as they tottered along floors
overhead, woke pulses of love in household hearts
that were not unmarked in heaven.

Her eyes are sweet and subtle, wild and sleepy
by turns ; oftentimes rising to the clouds ; oftentimes
challenging the heavens. She wears a diadem round
her head. And I knew by childish memories that she

605



THOMAS DE QUINCEY

could go abroad upon the winds, when she heard the
sobbing of litanies or the thundering of organs, and
when she beheld the mustering of summer clouds.
This sister, the elder, it is that carries keys more than
papal at her girdle, which open every cottage and every
palace. . .

By the power of her keys it is that Our Lady of
Tears glides a ghostly intruder into the chambers of
sleepless men, sleepless women, sleepless children. . .

Every captive in every dungeon ; — all that are be-
trayed, and all that are rejected ; outcasts by tradition-
ary law, and children of hereditary disgrace — all these
walk with Our Lady of Sighs. She also carries a key ; but
she needs it little. For her kingdom is chiefly amongst
the tents of Shem, and the houseless vagrant of every
clime. Yet in the very highest ranks of man she finds
chapels of her own ; and even in glorious England
there are some that, to the world, carry their heads
as proudly as the reindeer, who yet secretly have
received her mark upon their foreheads.

But the third sister, who is also the youngest

Hush ! whisper, whilst we talk of her ! Her kingdom
is not large, or else no flesh should live ; but within
that kingdom all power is hers. Her head, turreted
like that of Cybele, rises almost beyond the reach of
sight. She droops not ; and her eyes rising so high,
might be hidden by distance. But, being what they
are, they cannot be hidden ; through the treble veil
of crape which she wears, the fierce light of a blazing
misery, that rests not for matins or for vespers — for
noon of day or noon of night — for ebbing or for flowing
tide — may be read from the very ground. She is the
defier of God. She also is the mother of lunacies, and
the suggestress of suicides. Deep lie the roots of her
606



THOMAS DE QUINCEY



power ; but narrow is the nation that she rules. For
she can approach only those in whom a profound
nature has been upheaved by central convulsions ;
in whom the heart trembles and the brain rocks under
conspiracies of tempest from without and tempest
from within. Madonna moves with uncertain steps,
fast or slow, but still with tragic grace. Our Lady of
Sighs creeps timidly and stealthily. But this youngest
sister moves with incalculable motions, bounding, and
with a tiger's leaps. She carries no key ; for, though
coming rarely amongst men, she storms all doors at
■which she is permitted to enter at all. And her name
is Mater Tenebrarum — Our Lady of Darkness.

These were the Semnai Theai, or Sublime Goddesses
— these were the Eumenides, or Gracious Ladies (so
called by antiquity m shuddering propitiation) — of
my Oxford dreams.

Susftria de Profundi!

SIR WILLIAM NAPIER

1785-1860

364 tAlbuera

THE Fourth Division was composed of two
brigades : one of Portuguese under General
Harvey ; the other, under Sir William Myers, con-
sisting of the seventh and twenty-third regiments
was called the fusilier brigade : Harvey's Portuguese
were immediately pushed in between Lumley's
dragoons and the hill, where they were charged by
some French cavalry, whom they beat off, and mean-
time Cole led his fusiliers up the contested height. At
this time six guns were in the enemy's possession, the
whole of Werle's reserves were coming forward to

607



SIR WILLIAM NAPIER



reinforce the front column of the French, the remnant
of Houghton's brigade could no longer maintain its
ground, the field was heaped with carcasses, the lancers
were riding furiously about the captured artillery on
the upper parts of the hill, and behind all, Hamilton's
Portuguese and Alten's Germans, now withdrawing
from the bridge, seemed to be in full retreat. Soon
however Cole's fusiliers, flanked by a battalion of the
Lusitanian legion under Colonel Hawkshawe, mounted
the hill, drove off the lancers, recovered five of the
captured guns and one colour, and appeared on the
right of Houghton's brigade, precisely as Abercrombie
passed it on the left.

Such a gallant line, issuing from the midst of the
smoke and rapidly separating itself from the confused
and broken multitude, startled the enemy's masses,
which were increasing and pressing onwards as to an
assured victory ; they wavered, hesitated, and then
vomiting forth a storm of fire, hastily endeavoured
to enlarge their front, while a fearful discharge of
grape from all their artillery whistled through the
British ranks. Myers was killed, Cole and the three
colonels, Ellis, Blakeney and Hawkshawe, fell wounded,
and the fusilier battalions, struck by the iron tempest,
reeled and staggered like sinking ships ; but suddenly
and sternly recovering they closed on their terrible
enemies, and then was seen with what a strength and
majesty the British soldier fights. In vain did Soult
with voice and gesture animate his Frenchmen, in
vain did the hardiest veterans break from the crowded
columns and sacrifice their lives to gain time for the
mass to open out on such a fair field ; in vain did the
mass itself bear up, and, fiercely striving, fire indis-
criminately upon friends and foes, while the horsemen
608



SIR WILLIAM NAPIER



hovering on the flank threatened to charge the
advancing line. Nothing could stop that astonishing
infantry. No sudden burst of undisciplined valour,
no nervous enthusiasm weakened the stability of their
order, their flashing eyes were bent on the dark
columns in their front, their measured tread shook
the ground, their dreadful volleys swept away the head
of every formation, their deafening shouts overpowered
the dissonant cries that broke from all parts of the
tumultuous crowd, as slowly and with a horrid carnage
it was pushed by the incessant vigour of the attack
to the farthest edge of the hill. In vain did the French
reserves mix with the struggling multitude to sustain
the fight, their efforts only increased the irremediable
confusion, and the mighty mass, breaking off like
a loosened cliff, went headlong down the steep : the
rain flowed after in streams discoloured with blood,
and eighteen hundred unwounded men, the remnant
of six thousand unconquerable British soldiers, stood
triumphant on the fatal hill !

History of the War in the Peninsula

365 Salamanca

THE cannonade now became heavy, and the
spectacle surprisingly beautiful, for the lighter
smoke and mist, curling up in fantastic pillars, formed
a huge and glittering dome tinged of many colours by
the rising sun ; and through the grosser vapour below,
the restless horsemen were seen or lost as the fume
thickened from the rapid play of the guns, while the
bluff head of land, beyond the Trabancos, covered
with French troops, appeared, by an optical deception,
close at hand, dilated to the size of a mountain, and
2830 x 609



SIR WILLIAM NAPIER



crowned with gigantic soldiers, who were continually
breaking off and sliding down into the fight. Suddenly
a dismounted cavalry officer stalked from the midst
of the smoke towards the line of infantry ; his gait
was peculiarly rigid, and he appeared to hold a bloody
handkerchief to his heart, but that which seemed
a cloth, was a broad and dreadful wound ; a bullet
had entirely effaced the flesh from his left shoulder
and from his breast, and had carried away part of his
ribs, his heart was bared, and its movement plainly
discerned. It was a piteous and yet a noble sight, for
his countenance though ghastly was firm, his step
scarcely indicated weakness, and his voice never fal-
tered. This unyielding man's name was Williams ; he
died a short distance from the field of battle, and it
was said, in the arms of his son, a youth of fourteen,
who had followed his father to the Peninsula in hopes
of obtaining a commission, for they were not affluent.

History of the War in the Peninsula

THOMAS LOVE PEACOCK

1785-1866

366 The Learned Friend

' OD bless my soul, sir ! ' exclaimed the Reverend
\J Doctor Folliott, bursting, one fine May
morning, into the breakfast-room at Crotchet Castle,
' I am out of all patience with this march of mind.
Here has my house been nearly burned down, by my
cook taking it into her head to study hydrostatics, in
a sixpenny-tract, published by the Steam Intellect
Society, and written by a learned friend 1 who is for
doing all the world's business as well as his own, and
1 Lord Brougham.

610



THOMAS LOVE PEACOCK

is equally well qualified to handle every branch of
human knowledge. I have a great abomination of this
learned friend ; as author, lawyer, and politician, he
is triformis, like Hecate : and in every one of his three
forms he is btfrons, like Janus ; the true Mr. Facing-
both-ways of Vanity Fair. My cook must read his
rubbish in bed ; and as might naturally be expected,
she dropped suddenly fast asleep, overturned the candle,
and set the curtains in a blaze. Luckily, the footman
went into the room at the moment, in time to tear
down the curtains and throw them into the chimney,
and a pitcher of water on her nightcap extinguished
her wick : she is a greasy subject, and would have
burned like a short mould.'

Crotchet Castle

367 Picturesque (gardening

' ~\ TY dear Sir,' said Mr. Milestone, ' accord me
JLVJL your permission to wave the wand of enchant-
ment over your grounds. The rocks shall be blown
up, the trees shall be cut down, the wilderness and
all its goats shall vanish like mist. Pagodas and
Chinese bridges, gravel walks and shrubberies, bowling-
greens, canals, and clumps of larch, shall rise upon its
ruins. One age, Sir, has brought to light the treasures
of ancient learning : a second has penetrated into the
depths of metaphysics : a third has brought to per-
fection the science of astronomy : but it was reserved
for the exclusive genius of the present times, to invent
the noble art of picturesque gardening, which has
given, as it were, a new tint to the complexion of
nature, and a new outline to the physiognomy of the
universe ! '

611



THOMAS LOVE PEACOCK



' Give me leave,' said Sir Patrick O'Prism, ' to take
an exception to that same. Your system of levelling,
and trimming, and clipping, and docking, and clump-
ing, and polishing, and cropping, and shaving, destroys
all the beautiful intricacies of natural luxuriance, and
all the graduated harmonies of light and shade, melting
into one another, as you see them on that rock over
yonder. I never saw one of your improved places,
as you call them, and which are nothing but big
bowling-greens, like sheets of green paper, with a parcel
of round clumps scattered over them like so many
spots of ink, flicked at random out of a pen, and a
solitary animal here and there looking as if it were lost,
that I did not think it was for all the world like
Hounslow Heath, thinly sprinkled over with bushes
and highwaymen.'

' Sir,' said Mr. Milestone, ' you will have the good-
ness to make a distinction between the picturesque
and the beautiful.'

' Will I ? ' said Sir Patrick : ' och ! but I won't.
For what is beautiful ? That which pleases the eye.
And what pleases the eye ? Tints variously broken and
blended. Now, tints variously broken and blended
constitute the picturesque.'

' Allow me,' said Mr. Gall. ' I distinguish the
picturesque and the beautiful, and I add to them, in
the laying out of grounds, a third and distinct character,
which I call unexpectedness.'

' Pray, Sir,' said Mr. Milestone, ' by what name do
you distinguish this character, when a person walks
round the grounds for the second time ? '

Headlong Hall



612



MARY RUSSELL MITFORD

1787-1855

368 Hannah

SINCE the new marriage act, we, who belong to
country magistrates, have gained a priority over
the rest of the parish in matrimonial news. We
(the privileged) see on a work-day the names which
the Sabbath announces to the generality. Many a
blushing awkward pair hath our little lame clerk
(a sorry Cupid !) ushered in between dark and light
to stammer and hacker, to bow and curtsey, to sign
or make a mark, as it pleases Heaven. One Saturday,
at the usual hour, the limping clerk made his appear-
ance ; and, walking through our little hall, I saw a fine
athletic young man, the very image of health and vigour,
mental and bodily, holding the hand of a young woman,
who, with her head half buried in a geranium in the
window, was turning bashfully away, listening, and
yet not seeming to listen, to his tender whispers.
The shrinking grace of that bending figure, was not
to be mistaken. ' Hannah ! ' and she went aside
with me, and a rapid series of questions and answers
conveyed the story of the courtship. ' William was ',
said Hannah, ' a journeyman hatter in B. He had
walked over one Sunday evening to see the cricketing,
and then he came again. Her mother liked him.
Everybody liked her William — and she had promised —
she was going — was it wrong ? '• — ' Oh no ! — and where
are you to live ? ' — ' William has got a room in B.
He works for Mr. Smith, the rich hatter in the market-
place, and Mr. Smith speaks of him — oh so well !
But William will not tell me where our room is.
I suppose in some narrow street or lane, which he is
afraid I shall not like, as our common is so pleasant.

613



MARY RUSSELL MITFORD



He little thinks — anywhere.' — She stopped suddenly ;
but her blush and her clasped hands finished the sen-
tence, 'anywhere with him!' — 'And when is the
happy day? ' — ' On Monday fortnight, Madam,' said
the bridegroom elect, advancing with the little clerk
to summon Hannah to the parlour, ' the earliest day
possible.' He drew her arm through his, and we
parted.

The Monday fortnight was a glorious morning ;
one of those rare November days when the sky and air
are soft and bright as in April. ' What a beautiful
day for Hannah ! ' was the first exclamation of the
breakfast-table. ' Did she tell you where they should
dine f ' — ' No, ma'am ; I forgot to ask.' — ' I can tell
you,' said the master of the house, with somewhat
of good-humoured importance in his air, somewhat
of the look of a man who, having kept a secret as long
as it was necessary, is not sorry to get rid of the
burthen. ' I can tell you : in London.' — ' In London ! '
— ' Yes. Your little favourite has been in high luck.
She has married the only son of one of the best and
richest men in B., Mr. Smith, the great hatter. It
is quite a romance,' continued he ; ' William Smith
walked over one Sunday evening to see a match at
cricket. He saw our pretty Hannah, and forgot to
look at the cricketers. After having gazed his fill, he
approached to address her, and the little damsel was
off like a bird. William did not like her the less for
that, and thought of her the more. He came again,
and again ; and at last contrived to tame this wild
dove, and even to get the entree of the cottage. Hear-
ing Hannah talk is not the way to fall out of love with
her. So William, at last finding his case serious, laid
the matter before his father, and requested his consent
614



MARY RUSSELL MITFORD

to the marriage. Mr. Smith was at first a little startled ;
but William is an only son, and an excellent son ;
and, after talking with me, and looking at Hannah
(I believe her sweet face was the more eloquent
advocate of the two), he relented ; and having a spice
of his son's romance, finding that he had not mentioned
his situation in life, he made a point of its being kept
secret till the wedding-day. We have managed the
business of settlements ; and William, having discovered
that his fair bride has some curiosity to see London,
intends taking her thither for a fortnight. He will
then bring her home to one of the best houses in B.,
a fine garden, fine furniture, fine clothes, fine servants,
and more money than she will know what to do with.
Really the surprise of Lord E.'s farmer's daughter,
when, thinking she had married his steward, he brought
her to Burleigh, and installed her as its mistress, could
hardly have been greater. I hope the shock will not
kill Hannah though, as is said to have been the case
with that poor lady.' — ' Oh no ! Hannah loves her
husband too well. Anywhere with him ! '

And I was right. Hannah has survived the shock.
She is returned to B., and I have been to call upon
her. I never saw anything so delicate and bride-like
as she looked in her white gown and her lace mob, in
a room light and simple, and tasteful and elegant,
with nothing fine except some beautiful greenhouse
plants. Her reception was a charming mixture of
sweetness and modesty, a little more respectful than
usual, and far more shamefaced ! Poor thing ! her
cheeks must have pained her ! But this was the only
difference. In everything else she is still the same
Hannah, and has lost none of her old habits of kindness
and gratitude. She was making a handsome matronly

615



MARY RUSSELL MITFORD



cap, evidently for her mother, and spoke, even with
tears, of her new father's goodness to her and to Susan.
She would fetch the cake and wine herself, and would
gather, in spite of all remonstrance, some of her
choice flowers as a parting nosegay. She did, indeed,
just hint at her troubles with visitors and servants, —
how strange and sad it was ! seemed distressed at
ringing the bell, and visibly shrank from the sound of
a double knock. But, in spite of these calamities,
Hannah is a happy woman. The double rap was her
husband's ; and the glow on her cheek, and the smile
of her lips and eyes when he appeared, spoke more
plainly than ever, ' Anywhere with him ! '

Our Village

SIR HARRY SMITH

1787-1860

369 The Qhild of Hadajoz

AFTER the attacks upon the breaches, some time
_ before daylight Lord Fitzroy Somerset came to
our Division. I think I was almost the first officer
who spoke to him. He said, ' Where is Barnard ? '
I didn't know, but I assured his Lordship he was
neither killed nor wounded. A few minutes after his
Lordship said that the Duke desired the Light and
4th Divisions to storm again. ' The devil ! ' says I.
' Why, we have had enough ; we are all knocked to
pieces.' Lord Fitzroy says, ' I dare say, but you must
try again.' I smiled and said, ' If we could not
succeed with two whole fresh and unscathed Divisions,
we are likely to make a poor show of it now. But we
will try again with all our might.' Scarcely had this
conversation occurred when a bugle sounded within
616



SIR HARRY SMITH



the breach, indicating what had occurred at the
citadel and Puerto de Olivenca ; and here ended all
the fighting. Our fellows would have gone at it again
when collected and put into shape, but we were just
as well pleased that our attempt had so attracted the
attention of the enemy as greatly to facilitate that
success which assured the prize contended for.

There is no battle, day or night, I would not
willingly react except this. . .

The atrocities committed by our soldiers on the
poor innocent and defenceless inhabitants of the city,
no words suffice to depict. Civilized man, when let
loose and the bonds of morality relaxed, is a far greater
beast than the savage, more refined in his cruelty,
more fiend-like in every act ; and oh, too truly did
our heretofore noble soldiers disgrace themselves,
though the officers exerted themselves to the utmost
to repress it, many who had escaped the enemy being
wounded in their merciful attempts ! Yet this scene
of debauchery, however cruel to many, to me has been
the solace and the whole happiness of my life for thirty-
three years. A poor defenceless maiden of thirteen
years was thrown upon my generous nature through
her sister, as described so ably in Johnny Kincaid's
book, of which this is an extract —

' I was conversing with a friend the day after, at the door
of his tent, when we observed two ladies coming from the
city, who made directly towards us ; they seemed both
young, and when they came near, the elder of the two
threw back her mantilla to address us, showing a remarkably
handsome figure, with fine features ; but her sallow, sun-
burnt; and careworn, though still youthful, countenance
showed that in her " the time for tender thoughts and soft
endearments had fled away and gone."

617



SIR HARRY SMITH



' She at once addressed us in that confident, heroic
manner so characteristic of the high-bred Spanish maiden,
told us who they were — the last of an ancient and honourable
house — and referred to an officer high in rank in our army,
who had been quartered there in the days of her pros-
perity, for the truth of her tale.

' Her husband, she said, was a Spanish officer in a distant
part of the kingdom ; he might, or he might not, still be
living. But yesterday she and this her young sister were
able to live in affluence and in a handsome house ; to-day
they knew not where to lay their heads, where to get a
change of raiment or a morsel of bread. Her house, she
said, was a wreck ; and, to show the indignities to which
they had been subjected, she pointed to where the blood
was still trickling down their necks, caused by the wrenching
of their ear-rings through the flesh by the hands of worse than
savages, who would not take the trouble to unclasp them !

' For herself, she said, she cared not ; but for the agitated
and almost unconscious maiden by her side, whom she had
but lately received over from the hands of her conventual
instructresses, she was in despair, and knew not what to do ;
and that, in the rapine and rum which was at that moment
desolating the city, she saw no security for her but the
seemingly indelicate one she had adopted — of coming to
the camp and throwing themselves upon the protection of
any British officer who would afford it , and so great, she
said, was her faith in our national character, that she knew
the appeal would not be made in vain, nor the confidence
abused. Nor was it made in vain 1 Nor could it be abused,
for she stood by the side of an angel ! A being more tran-
scendingly lovely I had never before seen — one more amiable
I have never yet known 1

' Fourteen summers had not yet passed over her youthful
countenance, which was of a delicate freshness-^-more
English than Spanish ; her face, though not perhaps rigidly
beautiful, was nevertheless so remarkably handsome, and so
618



SIR HARRY SMITH



irresistibly attractive, surmounting a figure cast in nature's
fairest mould, that to look at her was to love her ; and
I did love her, but I never told my love, and in the mean
time another and more impudent fellow stepped in and
won her 1 But yet I was happy, for in him she found such
a one as her loveliness and her misfortunes claimed — a man
of honour, and a husband in every way worthy of her !

' That a being so young, so lovely, and so interesting,
just emancipated from the gloom of a convent, unknowing
of the world and to the world unknown, should thus have
been wrecked on a sea of troubles, and thrown on the mercy
of strangers under circumstances so dreadful, so uncontrol-
lable, and not have sunk to rise no more, must be the wonder
of every one Yet from the moment she was thrown on her
own resources, her star was in the ascendant.

' Guided by a just sense of rectitude, an innate purity of
mind, a singleness of purpose which defied malice, and a
soul that soared above circumstances, she became alike the
adored of the camp and of the drawing-room, and eventually
the admired associate of princes. She yet lives, in the
affections of her gallant husband, in an elevated situation in
life, a pattern to her sex, and everybody's beau ideal of what
a wife should be

' Thrown upon each other's acquaintance in a manner so
interesting, it is not to be wondered at that she and I con-
ceived a friendship for each other, which has proved as
lasting as our lives — a friendship which was cemented by
after-circumstances so singularly romantic that imagination
may scarcely picture them 1 The friendship of man is one
thing — the friendship of woman another ; and those only
who have been on the theatre of fierce warfare, and knowing
that such a being was on the spot, watching with earnest
and increasing solicitude over his safety, alike with those
most dear to her, can fully appreciate the additional value
which it gives to one's existence.' 1

1 From Random Shots by a Rifleman, by Sir John Kincaid.

619



SIR HARRY SMITH



I confess myself to be the ' more impudent fellow
and if any reward is due to a soldier, never was one
so honoured and distinguished as I have been by the
possession of this dear child (for she was little more
than a child at this moment), one with a sense of
honour no knight ever exceeded in the most romantic
days of chivalry, an understanding superior to her
years, a masculine mind with a force of character no
consideration could turn from her own just sense of
rectitude, and all encased in a frame of Nature's
fairest and most delicate moulding, the figure of an
angel, with an eye of light and expression which then
inspired me with a maddening love which, from that
period to this (now thirty-three years), has never
abated under many and the most trying circumstances.
Thus, as good may come out of evil, this scene of
devastation and spoil yielded to me a treasure invalu-
able ; to me who, among so many dear friends, had
escaped all dangers ; to me, a wild youth not meriting
such reward, and, however desirous, never able to
express half his gratitude to God Almighty for such
signal marks of His blessing shown to so young and so
thoughtless a being. From that day to this she has
been my guardian angel. She has shared with me the
dangers and privations, the hardships and fatigues, of
a restless life of war in every quarter of the globe.
No murmur has ever escaped her. Bereft of every
relative, of every tie to her country but the recollection
of it, united to a man of different though Christian
religion, yet that man has been and is her all, on whom
have hinged the closed portals of hope, happiness, and
bliss ; if opened, misery, destitution, and bereave-
ment, and every loss language can depict summed up
in one word, ' He is lost to me.' But, O my God,
620



SIR HARRY SMITH



Thou hast kindly spared us for each other ; we have,
through thy grace, been but little separated, and we
have, in unison of soul, received at Thy holy altar the
Blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
May we, through His mediation, be still spared to
each other in this life, and in the life to come be
eternally united in Heaven ! Autobiography

The lady here celebrated lived to give her name to Ladysmilh, to be
linked with a second great feat of the British arms.

MICHAEL SCOTT

1789-1835

370 aA Kings Ship

THERE was the corvette in very truth — she had
just tacked, and was close aboard of us on our lee
quarter, within musket-shot at the farthest, bowling
along upon a wind, with the green, hissing, multitu-
dinous sea surging along her sides, and washing up
in foam, like snow flakes, through the mid-ship ports,
far aft on the quarterdeck, to the glorification of Jack,
who never minds a wet jacket, so long as he witnesses
the discomfiture of his ally, Peter Pipeclay. The press
of canvas she was carrying laid her over, until her
copper sheathing, clear as glass, and glancing like gold,
was seen high above the water, throughout her whole
length, above which rose her glossy jet-black bends,
surmounted by a milk-white streak, broken at regular
intervals into eleven goodly ports, from which the
British cannon, ugly customers at the best, were
grinning, tompion out, open-mouthed at us ; and
above all, the clean, well-stowed white hammocks
filled the nettings, from tafferel to cat-head — oh !
that I had been in one of them, snug on the berth

621



MICHAEL SCOTT



deck ! Aloft, a cloud of white sail swelled to the
breeze, till the cloth seemed inclined to say good-bye
to the bolt-ropes, bending the masts like willow-
wands (as if the devil, determined to beat Paganini
himself, was preparing fiddle-sticks to play a spring
with, on the cracking and straining weather shrouds
and backstays), and tearing her sharp wedge-like bows
out of the bowels of the long swell, until the cutwater,
and ten yards of the keel next to it, were hove clean
out of the sea, into which she would descend again
with a roaring plunge, burying everything up to the
hause-holes, and driving the brine into mist, over the
fore-top, like vapour from a waterfall, through which,
as she rose again, the bright red copper on her bows
flashed back the sunbeams in momentary rainbows.
We were so near, that I could with the naked eye
distinctly see the faces of the men. There were at
least 150 determined fellows at quarters, and clustered
with muskets in their hands, wherever they could be
posted to most advantage.

There they were in groups about the ports (I could
even see the captains of the guns, examining the locks),
in their clean white frocks and trousers, the officers
of the ship, and the marines, clearly distinguishable
by their blue or red jackets. / could discern the very
sparkle of the epaulets.

High overhead, the red cross, that for a thousand
years ' has braved the battle and the breeze blew
out strong from the peak, like a sheet of flickering
white flame, or a thing instinct with life, struggling
to tear away the ensign haulyards, and to escape high
into the clouds ; while, from the main-royal-masthead,
the long white pennant streamed upwards into the
azure heavens, like a ray of silver light.

Tom Cringle's Log

622



PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY

1792-1822

371 Poetry

POETRY is indeed something divine. It is at
once the centre and circumference of knowledge ;
it is that which comprehends all science, and that to
which all science must be referred. It is at the same
time the root and blossom of all other systems of
thought ; it is that from which all spring, and that
which adorns all ; and that which, if blighted, denies
the fruit and the seed, and withholds from the barren
world the nourishment and the succession of the scions
of the tree of life. It is the perfect and consummate
surface and bloom of all things ; It IS ss the odour and
the colour of the rose to the texture of the elements
which compose it, as the form and splendour of un-
faded beauty to the secrets of anatomy and corruption.
What were virtue, love, patriotism, friendship — what
were the scenery of this beautiful universe which we
inhabit ; what were our consolations on this side of
the grave — and what were our aspirations beyond it,
if poetry did not ascend to bring light and fire from
those eternal regions where the owl-winged faculty
of calculation dare not ever soar ? Poetry is not like
reasoning, a power to be exerted according to the
determination of the will. A man cannot say, ' I will
compose poetry.' The greatest poet even cannot say
it ; for the mind in creation is as a fading coal, which
some invisible influence, like an inconstant wind,
awakens to transitory brightness ; this power arises
from within, like the colour of a flower which fades
and changes as it is developed, and the conscious
portions of our natures are unprophetic either of its
approach or its departure. Could this influence be

623



PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY



durable in its original purity and force, it is impossible
to predict the greatness of the results ; but when
composition begins, inspiration is already on the decline,
and the most glorious poetry that has ever been com-
municated to the world is probably a feeble shadow
of the original conceptions of the poet.

Poetry is the record of the best and happiest
moments of the happiest and best minds. We are
aware of evanescent visitations of thought and feeling
sometimes associated with place or person, sometimes
regarding our own mind alone, and always arising
unforeseen and departing unbidden, but elevating and
delightful beyond all expression . so that even in the
desire and regret they leave, there cannot but be
pleasure, participating as it does in the nature of its
object. It is as it were the interpenetration of a
diviner nature through our own ; but its footsteps
are like those of a wind over the sea, which the coming
calm erases, and whose traces remain only, as on the
wrinkled sand which paves it. These and corresponding
conditions of being are experienced principally by
those of the most delicate sensibility and the most
enlarged imagination ; and the state of mind produced
by them is at war with every base desire. The
enthusiasm of virtue, love, patriotism, and friendship,
is essentially linked with such emotions ; and whilst
they last, self appears as what it is, an atom to a
universe. Poets are not only subject to these experi-
ences as spirits of the most refined organization, but
they can colour all that they combine with the
evanescent hues of this ethereal world ; a word, a trait
in the representation of a scene or a passion, will touch
the enchanted chord, and reanimate, in those who
have ever experienced these emotions, the sleeping,
624



PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY



the cold, the buried image of the past. Poetry thus
makes immortal all that is best and most beautiful
in the world ; it arrests the vanishing apparitions
which haunt the interlunations of life, and veiling
them, or in language or in form, sends them forth
among mankind, bearing sweet news of kindred joy
to those with whom their sisters abide — abide, because
there is no portal of expression from the caverns of
the spirit which they inhabit into the universe of
things. Poetry redeems from decay the visitations
of the divinity in man.

A Defence of Poetry

FREDERICK MARRYAT

1792-1848

372 S^aval 'Politeness

WHEN Jack Easy had gained the deck he found
the sun shining gaily, a soft air blowing from the
shore, and the whole of the rigging and every part of
the ship loaded with the shirts, trousers, and jackets
of the seamen, which had been wetted during the heavy
gale, and were now hanging up to dry ; all the wet
sails were also spread on the booms or triced up in the
rigging, and the ship was slowly forging through the
blue water. The captain and first lieutenant were
standing on the gangway in converse, and the majority
of the officers were with their quadrants and sextants
ascertaining the latitude at noon. The decks were white
and clean, the sweepers had just laid by their brooms,
and the men were busy coiling down the ropes. It
was a scene of cheerfulness, activity, and order, which
lightened his heart after the four days of suffering, close
air, and confinement, from which he had just emerged.

625



FREDERICK MARRYAT



The captain, who perceived him, beckoned to him,
asked him kindly how he felt ; the first lieutenant also
smiled upon him, and many of the officers, as well as
his messmates, congratulated him upon his recovery.

The captain's steward came up to him, touched his
hat, and requested the pleasure of his company to
dinner in the cabin. Jack was the essence of politeness,
took off his hat, and accepted the invitation. Jack was
standing on a rope which a seaman was coiling down ;
the man touched his hat and requested he would be so
kind as to take his foot off. Jack took his hat off his
head in return, and his foot off the rope. The master
touched his hat and reported twelve o'clock to the first
lieutenant — the first lieutenant touched his hat and
reported twelve o'clock to the captain — the captain
touched his hat and told the first lieutenant to make it
so. The officer of the watch touched his hat, and
asked the captain whether they should pipe to dinner
— the captain touched his hat, and said, ' If you
please.'

The midshipman received his orders — and touched
his hat — which he gave to the head boatswain's mate,
who touched his hat, and then the calls whistled
cheerily.

' Well,' thought Jack, ' politeness seems to be the
order of the day, and every one has an equal respect
for the other.' Jack stayed on deck ; he peeped
through the ports, which were open, and looked down
into the deep blue wave ; he cast his eyes aloft, and
watched the tall spars sweeping and tracing with their
points, as it were, a small portion of the clear sky, as
they acted in obedience to the motion of the vessel ;
he looked forward at the range of carronades which
lin«d the sides of the deck, and then he proceeded to
626



FREDERICK MARRYAT



climb one of the carronades, and lean over the ham-
mocks to gaze on the distant land.

' Young gentleman, get off those hammocks,' cried
the master, who was officer of the watch, in a surly tone.

Jack looked round.

' Do you hear me, sir ? I'm speaking to you,' said
the master again.

Jack felt very indignant, and he thought that polite-
ness was not quite so general as he supposed.

Mr Midshipman Easy

373 Weathering the Point

ON deck the superior officers were in conversation
with the captain, who had expressed the same
fear that O'Brien had in our berth. The men, who
knew what they had to expect — for this sort of intelli-
gence is soon communicated through a ship — were
assembled in knots, looking very grave, but at the same
time not wanting in confidence. They knew that they
could trust to the captain, as far as skill or courage
could avail them ; and sailors are too sanguine to
despair, even at the last moment. . .

Before twelve o'clock the rocky point which we so
much dreaded was in sight, broad on the lee bow ; and
if the low sandy coast appeared terrible, how much
more did this, even at a distance : the black masses of
rock covered with foam, which each minute dashed
up in the air higher than our lower mast-heads. The
captain eyed it for some minutes in silence, as if in
calculation.

' Mr. Falcon,' said he at last, ' we must put the
mainsail on her.'

' She never can bear it, sir.'

627



FREDERICK MARRYAT



' She must bear it,' was the reply. ' Send the men
aft to the mainsheet. See that careful men attend the
tramlines.'

The mainsail was set, and the effect of it upon the
ship was tremendous. She careened over so that her
lee channels were under the water ; and when pressed
by a sea, the lee side of the quarter-deck and gangway
were afloat. She now reminded me of a goaded and
fiery horse, mad with the stimulus applied ; not rising
as before, but forcing herself through whole seas, and
dividing the waves, which poured in one continual
torrent from the forecastle down upon the decks
below. Four men were secured to the wheel — the
sailors were obliged to cling, to prevent being washed
away — the ropes were thrown in confusion to leeward
— the shot rolled out of the lockers, and every eye was
fixed aloft, watching the masts, which were expected
every moment to go over the side. A heavy sea struck
us on the broadside, and it was some moments before
the ship appeared to recover herself ; she reeled,
trembled, and stopped her way, as if it had stupefied
her. The first lieutenant looked at the captain as if
to say, ' This will not do.' ' It is our only chance,'
answered the captain to the appeal. That the ship
went faster through the water, and held a better wind,
was certain ; but just before we arrived at the point,
the gale increased in force. ' If any thing starts, we
are lost, sir,' observed the first lieutenant again.

' I am perfectly aware of it,' replied the captain,
in a calm tone. . . ' 'Twill be touch and go indeed,
Falcon.' . . ' Come aft, you and I must take the
helm. We shall want nerve there, and only there, now.'

The captain and first lieutenant went aft, and took
the forespokes of the wheel, and O'Brien, at a sign
628



FREDERICK MARRYAT

made by the captain, laid hold of the spokes behind
him. An old quarter-master kept his station' at the
fourth. The roaring of the seas on the rocks, with the
howling of the wind, was dreadful ; but the sight
was more dreadful than the noise. For a few moments
I shut my eyes, but anxiety forced me to open them
again. As near as I could judge, we were not twenty
yards from the rocks, at the time that the ship passed
abreast of them. We were in the midst of the foam,
which boiled around us ; and as the ship was driven
nearer to them, and careened with the wave, I thought
that our main yard-arm would have touched the rock ;
and at this moment a gust of wind came on which
laid the ship on her beam-ends, and checked her
progress through the water, while the accumulated
noise was deafening. A few moments more the ship
dragged on, another wave dashed over her and spent
itself upon the rocks, while the spray was dashed back
from them, and returned upon the decks. The main
rock was within ten yards of her counter, when
another gust of wind laid us on our beam-ends ; the
foresail and mainsail split, and were blown clean out
of the bolt-ropes — the ship righted, trembling fore
and aft. I looked astern : — the rocks were to windward
on our quarter, and we were safe.

Peter Simple

JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART

1794-1854

374 The Death of Sir Walter

AS I was dressing on the morning of Monday, the
JLX. 17th of September, Nicolson came into my room,
and told me that his master had awoke in a state of

629



JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART

composure and consciousness, and wished to see me
immediately. I found him entirely himself, though
in the last extreme of feebleness. His eye was clear
and calm — every trace of the wild fire of delirium
extinguished. ' Lockhart,' he said, ' I may have but
a minute to speak to you. My dear, be a good man —
be virtuous — be religious — be a good man. Nothing
else will give you any comfort when you come to lie
here.' He paused, and I said, ' Shall I send for Sophia
and Anne ? ' ' No,' said he, ' don't disturb them.
Poor souls ! I know they were up all night — God
bless you all.' With this he sunk into a very tranquil
sleep, and, indeed, he scarcely afterwards gave any
sign of consciousness, except for an instant on the
arrival of his sons. They, on learning that the scene
was about to close, obtained anew leave of absence
from their posts, and both reached Abbotsford on
the 19th. About half-past one p.m., on the 21st of
September, Sir Walter breathed his last, in the presence
of all his children. It was a beautiful day — so warm
that every window was wide open, and so perfectly still
that the sound of all others most delicious to his ear,
the gentle ripple of the Tweed over its pebbles, was
distinctly audible as we knelt around the bed, and his
eldest sen kissed and closed his eyes.

Life of Sir Waller Scott

THOMAS CARLYLE

1795-1881

375 yocelin of Tlrakelond

JOCELIN, we said, was somewhat of a Boswell ;
but unfortunately, by Nature, he is none of the
largest, and distance has now dwarfed him to an ex-
treme degree. His light is most feeble, intermittent,
630



THOMAS CARLYLE



and requires the intensest kindest inspection ; otherwise
it will disclose mere vacant haze. It must be owned,
the good Jocehn, spite of his beautiful childlike
character, is but an altogether imperfect ' mirror ' of
these old-world things ! The good man, he looks on
us so clear and cheery, and in his neighbourly soft-
smihng eyes we see so well our own shadow, — we have
a longing always to cross-question him, to force from
him an explanation of much. But no ; Jocelin, though
he talks with such clear familiarity, like a next-door
neighbour, will not answer any question : that is the
peculiarity of him, dead these six hundred and fifty
years, and quite deaf to us, though still so audible !
The good man, he cannot help it, nor can we.

But truly it is a strange consideration this simple one,
as we go on with him, or indeed with any lucid
simple-hearted soul like him : Behold therefore, this
England of the Year 1200 was no chimerical vacuity or
dreamland, peopled with mere vaporous Phantasms,
Rymer's Fcedera, and Doctrines of the Constitution ;
but a green solid place, that grew corn and several
other things. The Sun shone on it ; the vicissitude
of seasons and human fortunes. Cloth was woven
and worn ; ditches were dug, furrow-fields ploughed,
and houses built. Day by day all men and cattle
rose to labour, and night by night returned home
weary to their several lairs. In wondrous Dualism,
then as now, lived nations of breathing men ; alternat-
ing, in all ways, between Light and Dark ; between
joy and sorrow, between rest and toil, — between hope,
hope reaching high as Heaven, and fear deep as very
Hell. Not vapour Phantasms, Rymer's Fcedera at all !
Cceur-de-Lion was not a theatrical popinjay with
greaves and steel-cap on it, but a man living upon

631



THOMAS CARLYLE



victuals, — not imported by Peel's Tariff. Cceur-de-
Lion came palpably athwart this Jocelin at St.
Edmundsbury ; and had almost peeled the sacred gold
' Feretrum ', or St. Edmund Shrine itself, to ransom
him out of the Danube Jail.

These clear eyes of neighbour Jocelin looked on the
bodily presence of King John ; the very John Sansterre,
or Lackland, who signed Magna Charta afterwards
in Runnymead. Lackland, with a great retinue,
boarded once, for the matter of a fortnight, in St.
Edmundsbury Convent ; daily in the very eyesight,
palpable to the very fingers of our Jocelin : O Jocelin,
what did he say, what did he do ; how looked he, lived
he, — at the very lowest, what coat or breeches had
he on? Jocelin is obstinately silent. Jocelin marks
down what interests htm ; entirely deaf to us. With
Jocelin's eyes we discern almost nothing of John Lack-
land. As through a glass darkly, we with our own eyes
and appliances, intensely looking, discern at most :
A blustering, dissipated human figure, with a kind of
blackguard quality air, in cramoisy velvet, or other
uncertain texture, uncertain cut, with much plumage
and fringing ; amid numerous other human figures
of the like ; riding abroad with hawks ; talking noisy
nonsense ; — tearing out the bowels of St. Edmunds-
bury Convent (its larders namely and cellars) in the
most ruinous way, by living at rack and manger there.
Jocelin notes only, with a slight subacidity of manner,
that the King's Majesty, Dominus Rex, did leave, as
gift for our St. Edmund Shrine, a handsome enough
silk cloak, — or rather pretended to leave, for one of
his retinue borrowed it of us, and we never got sight
of it again ; and, on the whole, that the Dominus Rex,
at departing, gave us ' thirteen sterhngtt ', one shilling
632



THOMAS CARLYLE



and one penny, to say a mass for him ; and so departed,
— like a shabby Lackland as he was ! ' Thirteen pence
sterling,' this was what the Convent got from Lackland,
for all the victuals he and his had made away with.
We of course said our mass for him, having covenanted
to do it, — but let impartial posterity judge with what
degree of fervour !

And in this manner vanishes King Lackland ;
traverses swiftly our strange intermittent magic-
mirror, jingling the shabby thirteen pence merely ;
and rides with his hawks into Egyptian night again.
It is Jocelyn's manner with all things ; and it is men's
manner and men's necessity. How intermittent is
our good Jocelin ; marking down, without eye to us,
what he finds interesting ! How much in Jocelin, as
in all History, and indeed in all Nature, is at once
inscrutable and certain ; so dim, yet so indubitable ;
exciting us to endless considerations. For King
Lackland was there, verily he ; and did leave these
tredecim sterlingu, if nothing more, and did live and
look in one way or the other, and a whole world was
living and looking along with him !

Past and Present

3j6 Teufelsdrockh' ' s Watch-Tower

AS for Teufelsdrockh, except by his nightly appear-
jfjL ances at the Grune Gans, Weissnichtwo saw little
of him, felt little of him. Here, over his tumbler of
Gukguk, he sat reading Journals ; sometimes contem-
platively looking into the clouds of his tobacco-pipe,
without other visible employment : always, from his
mild ways, an agreeable phenomenon there ; more
especially when he opened his lips for speech ; on

633



THOMAS CARLYLE



which occasions the whole Coffee-house would hush
itself into silence, as if sure to hear something note-
worthy. Nay, perhaps to hear a whole series and river
of the most memorable utterances ; such as, when
once thawed, he would for hours indulge in, with fit
audience : and the more memorable, as issuing from
a head apparently not more interested in them, not
more conscious of them, than is the sculptured stone
head of some public fountain, which through its brass
mouth-tube emits water to the worthy and the un-
worthy ; careless whether it be for cooking victuals
or quenching conflagrations ; indeed, maintains the
same earnest assiduous look, whether any water be
flowing or not.

To the Editor of these sheets, as to a young enthusi-
astic Englishman, however unworthy, Teufelsdrockh
opened himself perhaps more than to the most. Pity
only that we could not then half guess his importance,
and scrutinise him with due power of vision ! We
enjoyed, what not three men in Weissnichtwo could
boast of, a certain degree of access to the Professor's
private domicile. It was the attic floor of the highest
house in the Wahngasse ; and might truly be called
the pinnacle of Weissnichtwo, for it rose sheer up
above the contiguous roofs, themselves rising from
elevated ground. Moreover, with its windows it
looked towards all the four Orte, or as the Scotch say,
and we ought to say, Airts : the sitting-room itself
commanded three ; another came to view in the
Schlafgemach (bed-room) at the opposite end ; to say
nothing of the kitchen, which offered two, as it were,
duplicates, and showing nothing new. So that it
was in fact the speculum or watch-tower of Teufels-
drockh ; wherefrom, sitting at ease, he might see the
634



THOMAS CARLYLE



whole life-circulation of that considerable City; the
streets and lanes of which, with all their doing and
driving (Thun und Treiben), were for the most part
visible there.

' I look down into all that wasp-nest or bee-hive,'
have we heard him say, ' and witness their wax-laying
and honey-making, and poison-brewing, and choking
by sulphur. From the Palace esplanade, where music
plays while Serene Highness is pleased to eat his
victuals, down to the low lane, where in her door-sill
the aged widow, knitting for a thin livelihood, sits
to feel the afternoon sun, I see it all ; for, except the
Schlosskirche weather-cock, no biped stands so high.
Couriers arrive bestrapped and bebooted, bearing Joy
and Sorrow bagged-up in pouches of leather : there,
topladen, and with four swift horses, rolls-in the
country Baron and his household; here, on timber -leg,
the lamed Soldier hops painfully along, begging alms :
a thousand carriages, and wains, and cars, come
tumbling-in with Food, with young Rusticity, and
other Raw Produce, inanimate or animate, and go
tumbling out again with Produce manufactured. That
living flood, pouring through these streets, of all
qualities and ages, knowest thou whence it is coming,
whither it is going ? Aus der Ewigkeit, zu der Ewigkeit
bin : From Eternity, onwards to Eternity ! These
are Apparitions : what else ? Are they not Souls
rendered visible : in Bodies, that took shape and will
lose it, melting into air ? Their solid Pavement is
a Picture of the Sense ; they walk on the bosom of
Nothing, blank Time is behind them and before
them. Or fanciest thou, the red and yellow Clothes-
screen yonder, with spurs on its heels and feather
in its crown, is but of To-day, without a Yesterday or

635



THOMAS CARLYLE



a To-morrow ; and had not rather its Ancestor alive
when Hengst and Horsa overran thy Island ? Friend,
thou seest here a living link in that Tissue of History,
which inweaves all Being : watch well, or it will be
past thee, and seen no more.'

Sartor Resartus

377 Triedrich Wilhelrtfs 'Tobacco-
c Parliament

A HIGH large Room, as the Engravings (mostly
worthless) give it us : contented saturnine
human figures, a dozen or so of them, sitting round
a large long Table, furnished for the occasion ; long
Dutch pipe in the mouth of each man ; supplies of
knaster easily accessible ; small pan of burning peat,
in the Dutch fashion (sandy native charcoal, which
burns slowly without smoke), is at your left hand ;
at your right a jug, which I find to consist of excellent
thin bitter beer. Other costlier materials for drinking,
if you want such, are not beyond reach. On side-
tables stand wholesome cold-meats, royal rounds of
beef not wanting, with bread thinly sliced and buttered:
in a rustic but neat and abundant way, such innocent
accommodations, narcotic or nutritious, gaseous, fluid
and solid, as human nature, bent on contemplation
and an evening lounge, can require. Perfect equality
is to be the rule ; no rising, or notice taken, when
anybody enters or leaves. Let the entering man take
his place and pipe, without obligatory remarks : if
he cannot smoke, which is Seckendorf's case for
instance, let him at least affect to do so, and not ruffle
the established stream of things. And so, Puff, slowly
636



THOMAS CARLYLE



Pff ! — and any comfortable speech that is in you ;
or none, if you authentically have not any.

Old official gentlemen, military for most part ;
Grumkow, Derschau, Old Dessauer (when at hand),
Seckendorf, old General Flans (rugged Platt-Deutsch
specimen, capable of tocadtlle or backgammon, capable
of rough slashes of sarcasm when he opens his old beard
for speech) : these, and the like of these, intimate
confidants of the King, men who could speak a little,
or who could be socially silent otherwise, — seem to
have been the staple of the Institution Strangers of
mark, who happened to be passing, were occasional
guests ; Gmckel the Dutch Ambassador, though
foreign like Seckendorf, was well seen there ; garrulous
Pollmtz, who has wandered over all the world, had
a standing invitation. Kings, high Princes on visit,
were sure to have the honour. The Crown-Prince,
now and afterwards, was often present ; oftener than
he liked, — in such an atmosphere, in such an element.
' The little Princes were all wont to come in,' doffing
their bits of triangular hats, ' and bid Papa goodnight.
One of the old Generals would sometimes put them
through their exercise ; and the little creatures were
unwilling to go away to bed.'

In such Assemblage, when business of importance,
foreign or domestic, was not occupying the royal
thoughts, — the Talk, we can believe, was rambling
and multifarious : the day's hunting, if at Wuster-
hausen ; the day's news, if at Berlin or Potsdam ; old
reminiscences, too, I can fancy, turning up, and talk,
even in Seckendorf's own time, about Siege of Menin
(where your Majesty first did me the honour of some
notice), Siege of Stralsund, and — duly on September
nth at least — Malplaquet, with Marlborough and

637



THOMAS CARLYLE



Eugene : what Marlborough said, looked : and es-
pecially Lottum, late Feldmarschall Lottum ; and
how the Prussian Infantry held firm, like a wall of
rocks, when the horse were swept away, — rocks highly
volcanic, and capable of rolling forward too ; and
' how a certain Adjutant ' (Derschau smokes harder,
and blushes brown) ' snatched poor Tettau on his
back, bleeding to death, amid the iron whirlwinds,
and brought him out of shot-range.' — ' Hm, na, such
a Day, that, Herr Feldzeugmeister, as we shall not
see again till the Last of the Days ! '

Frederick the Great

JOHN KEATS

1795-1821

378 The Harp Molian

MY dear Reynolds — I had an idea that a Man
might pass a very pleasant life in this manner —
Let him on a certain day read a certain page of full
Poesy or distilled Prose, and let him wander with it,
and muse upon it, and reflect from it, and bring
home to it, and prophesy upon it, and dream upon
it : until it becomes stale — But when will it do so ?
Never — When Man has arrived at a certain ripeness
in intellect any one grand and spiritual passage serves
him as a starting-post towards all ' the two-and-
thirty Palaces.' How happy is such a voyage of
conception, what delicious diligent indolence ! A doze
upon a sofa does not hinder it, and a nap upon Clover
engenders ethereal finger-pointings — the prattle of
a child gives it wings, and the converse of middle-age
a strength to beat them — a strain of music conducts
to ' an odd angle of the Isle,' and when the leaves
638



JOHN KEATS

whisper it puts a girdle round the earth. — Nor will
this sparing touch of noble Books be any irreverence to
their Writers — for perhaps the honors paid by Man
to Man are trifles in comparison to the benefit done
by great works to the ' spirit and pulse of good ' by
their mere passive existence. Memory should not be
called Knowledge — Many have original minds who
do not think it — they are led away by Custom. Now
it appears to me that almost any Man may like the
spider spin from his own inwards his own airy Citadel—
the points of leaves and twigs on which the spider
begins her work are few, and she fills the air with
a beautiful circuiting, Man should be content with
as few points to tip with the fine Web of his Soul,
and weave a tapestry empyrean — full of symbols for
his spiritual eye, of softness for his spiritual touch,
of space for his wandering, of distinctness for his
luxury. But the minds of mortals are so different
and bent on such diverse journeys that it may at first
appear impossible for any common taste and fellowship
to exist between two or three under these suppositions.
It is however quite the contrary. Minds would leave
each other in contrary directions, traverse each other
in numberless points, and at last greet each other at
the journey's end. An old man and a child would talk
together and the old man be led on his path and the
child left thinking. Man should not dispute or assert,
but whisper results to his Neighbour, and thus by
every germ of spirit sucking the sap from mould
ethereal every human might become great, and human-
ity instead of being a wide heath of furze and briars,
with here and there a remote Oak or Pine, would
become a grand democracy of forest trees. . . Now it
is more noble to sit like Jove than to fly like Mercury :

639



JOHN KEATS

— let us not therefore go hurrying about and collecting
honey, bee-hke, buzzing here and there impatiently
from a knowledge of what is to be arrived at. But let
us open our leaves like a flower, and be passive and
receptive ; budding patiently under the eye of Apollo
and taking hints from every noble insect that favours
us with a visit — Sap will be given us for meat, and
dew for drink. I was led into these thoughts,
my dear Reynolds, by the beauty of the morning
operating on a sense of Idleness. I have not read any
Books — the Morning said I was right — I had no idea
but of the Morning, and the Thrush said I was right.

Letters

379 tA'xioms of ^Poetry

IN Endymion, I have most likely but moved into the
go-cart from the leading-strings — In poetry I have
a few axioms, and you will see how far I am from their
centre.

1st. I think poetry should surprise by a fine excess,
and not by singularity ; It should strike the reader
as a wording of his own highest thoughts, and appear
almost a remembrance.

2d. Its touches of beauty should never be half-way,
thereby making the reader breathless, instead of con-
tent. The rise, the progress, the setting of Imagery
should, like the sun, come natural to him, shine over
him, and set soberly, although in magnificence, leaving
him in the luxury of twilight. But it is easier to think
what poetry should be, than to write it — And this
leads me to

Another axiom — That if poetry comes not as natur-
ally as the leaves to a tree, it had better not come at
640



JOHN KEATS

all. — However it may be with me, I cannot help
looking into new countries with '0 for a Muse of
Fire to ascend ! ' If Endymion serves me as a pioneer,
perhaps I ought to be content — I have great reason to
be content, for thank God I can read, and perhaps
understand Shakspeare to his depths ; and I have, I am
sure, many friends, who, if I fail, will attribute any
change in my life and temper to humbleness rather
than pride — to a cowering under the wings of great
poets, rather than to a bitterness that I am not
appreciated.

Letter to John Taylor, 27 February 1818

WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT

1796-1859

380 The First Sight of Mexico

THEY had not advanced far, when, turning an
angle of the sierra, they suddenly came on a view
which more than compensated the toils of the pre-
ceding day. It was that of the valley of Mexico, or
Tenochtitlan, as more commonly called by the natives ;
which, with its picturesque assemblage of water,
woodland, and cultivated plains, its shining cities and
shadowy hills, was spread out like some gay and
gorgeous panorama before them. In the highly
rarefied atmosphere of these upper regions, even
remote objects have a brilliancy of colouring and
a distinctness of outline which seem to annihilate
distance. Stretching far away at their feet were seen
noble forests of oak, sycamore, and cedar, and beyond,
yellow fields of maize and the towering maguey, inter-
mingled with orchards and blooming gardens ; for
flowers, in such demand for their religious festivals,

2830 Y 641



WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT



were even more abundant in this populous valley than
in other parts of Anahuac. In the centre of the great
basin were beheld the lakes, occupying then a much
larger portion of its surface than at present ; their
borders thickly studded with towns and hamlets, and,
in the midst — like some Indian empress with her
coronal of pearls — the fair city of Mexico, with her
white towers and pyramidal temples, reposing, as it
were, on the bosom of the waters— the far-famed
' Venice of the Aztecs '. High over all rose the royal
hill of Chapoltepec, the residence of the Mexican
monarchs, crowned with the same grove of gigantic
cypresses which at this day fling their broad shadows
over the land. In the distance beyond the blue waters
of the lake, and nearly screened by intervening foliage,
was seen a shining speck, the rival capital of Tezcuco,
and, still further on, the dark belt of porphyry,
girdling the valley around like a rich setting which
Nature had devised for the fairest of her jewels.

Such was the beautiful vision which broke on the eyes
of the Conquerors. And even now, when so sad a
change has come over the scene ; when the stately
forests have been laid low, and the soil, unsheltered
from the fierce radiance of a tropical sun, is in many
places abandoned to sterility ; when the waters have
retired, leaving a broad and ghastly margin white with
the incrustation of salts, while the cities and hamlets
on their borders have mouldered into ruins ; — even
now that desolation broods over the landscape, so
indestructible are the lines of beauty which Nature
has traced on its features, that no traveller, however
cold, can gaze on them with any other emotions
than those of astonishment and rapture.

What, then, must have been the emotions of the
64a



WILLIAM H. PRESCOTT



Spaniards, when, after working their toilsome way into
the upper air, the cloudy tabernacle parted before
their eyes, and they beheld these fair scenes in all their
pristine magnificence and beauty ! It was like the
spectacle which greeted the eyes of Moses from the
summit of Pisgah ; and, in the warm glow of their
feelings, they cried out, ' It is the promised land ! '

History of the Conquest of Mexico

GEORGE ROBERT GLEIG

1796-1888

381 Waterloo

IT was now eight o'clock in the evening, or perhaps
a little later. The physical strength of the com-
batants on both sides had become well nigh exhausted,
and on the part of the English there was a feverish
desire to close with the enemy, and bring matters to
an issue. Up to the present moment, however, the
Duke had firmly restrained them. For all purposes
of defensive warfare they were excellent troops ; the
same blood was in their veins which had stirred their
more veteran comrades of the Peninsula, but, as has
elsewhere been explained, four-fifths of the English
regiments were raw levies — second battalions, to
manceuvre with which in the presence of a skilful
enemy might have been dangerous. Steadily therefore,
and with a wise caution, the Duke held them in hand,
giving positive orders to each of his generals that they
should not follow up any temporary success, so as to
endanger the consistency of their lines, but return after
every charge to the crest of the hill, and be content
with holding that. Now, however, the moment was
come for acting on a different principle. Not by Adam

643



GEORGE ROBERT GLEIG



and Maitland alone, but by the brigades of Ompteda,
Pack, Kempt, and Lambert, the enemy had been
overthrown with prodigious slaughter, and all equally
panted to be let loose. Moreover, from minute
to minute the sound of firing in the direction of
Planchenoit became more audible. It was clear,
therefore, that even young troops might be slipped in
pursuit without much hazard to their own safety, and
the Duke let his people go. The lines of infantry were
simultaneously formed, the cavalry mounted and rode
on, and then a cheer began on the right, which flew
like electricity throughout the entire extent of the
position. Well was it understood, especially by those
who, on a different soil and under a warmer sun, had
often listened to similar music.

Story of the Battle of Waterloo

THOMAS BABINGTON, LORD
MACAULAY

1800-1859

382 Qlive at T'/assey

CLIVE was in a painfully anxious situation. He
could place no confidence in the sincerity or in
the courage of his confederate : and, whatever con-
fidence he might place in his own military talents, and
in the valour and discipline of his troops, it was no
light thing to engage an army twenty times as numerous
as his own. Before him lay a river over which it was
easy to advance, but over which, if things went ill, not
one of his little band would ever return. On this
occasion, for the first and for the last time, his daunt-
less spirit, during a few hours, shrank from the fearful
644



LORD MACAULAY

responsibility of making a decision. He called a
council of war. The majority pronounced against
fighting ; and Clive declared his concurrence with the
majority. Long afterwards, he said that he had never
called but one council of war, and that, if he had taken
the advice of that council, the British would never have
been masters of Bengal. But scarcely had the meeting
broken up when he was himself again. He retired
alone under the shade of some trees, and passed near
an hour there in thought. He came back determined
to put everything to the hazard, and gave orders that
all should be in readiness for passing the river on the
morrow.

The river was passed ; and, at the close of a toilsome
day's march, the army, long after sunset, took up its
quarters in a grove of mango-trees near Plassey, within
a mile of the enemy. Clive was unable to sleep ; he
heard, through the whole night, the sound of drums
and cymbals from the vast camp of the Nabob. It is
not strange that even his stout heart should now and
then have sunk, when he reflected against what odds,
and for what a prize, he was in a few hours to contend.

Nor was the rest of Surajah Dowlah more peaceful.
His mind, at once weak and stormy, was distracted by
wild and horrible apprehensions. Appalled by the
greatness and nearness of the crisis, distrusting his
captains, dreading every one who approached him,
dreading to be left alone, he sat gloomily in his tent,
haunted, a Greek poet would have said, by the furies
of those who had cursed him with their last breath in
the Black Hole.

The day broke, the day which was to decide the fate
of India. At sunrise the army of the Nabob, pouring
through many openings from the camp, began to move

64s



LORD MACAULAY



towards the grove where the English lay. Forty
thousand infantry, armed with firelocks, pikes, swords,
bows and arrows, covered the plain. They were
accompanied by fifty pieces of ordnance of the largest
size, each tugged by a long team of white oxen, and
each pushed on from behind by an elephant. Some
smaller guns, under the direction of a few French
auxiliaries, were perhaps more formidable. The cavalry
were fifteen thousand, drawn, not from the effeminate
population of Bengal, but from the bolder race which
inhabits the northern provinces ; and the practised eye
of Clive could perceive that both the men and the
horses were more powerful than those of the Carnatic.
The force which he had to oppose to this great multi-
tude consisted of only three thousand men. But of
these nearly a thousand were English ; and all were
led by English officers, and trained in the English
discipline. Conspicuous in the ranks of the little army
were the men of the Thirty-Ninth Regiment, which
still bears on its colours, amidst many honourable
additions won under Wellington in Spain and Gascony,
the name of Plassey, and the proud motto, Primus in
Indis.

The battle commenced with a cannonade in which
the artillery of the Nabob did scarcely any execution,
while the few field-pieces of the English produced
great effect. Several of the most distinguished officers
in Surajah Dowlah's service fell. Disorder began to
spread through his ranks. His own terror increased
every moment. One of the conspirators urged on him
the expediency of retreating. The insidious advice,
agreeing as it did with what his own terrors suggested,
was readily received. He ordered his army to fall
back, and this order decided his fate. Clive snatched
646



LORD MACAULAY



the moment, and ordered his troops to advance. The
confused and dispirited multitude gave way before the
onset of disciplined valour. No mob attacked by
regular soldiers was ever more completely routed.
The little band of Frenchmen, who alone ventured to
confront the English, were swept down the stream of
fugitives. In an hour the forces of Surajah Dowlah
were dispersed, never to reassemble. Only five hundred
of the vanquished were slain. But their camp, their
guns, their baggage, innumerable wagons, innumer-
able cattle, remained in the power of the conquerors.
With the loss of twenty-two soldiers killed and fifty
wounded, Clive had scattered an army of near sixty
thousand men, and subdued an empire larger and more
populous than Great Britain.

Essays

383 Warren Hastings

THE culprit was indeed not unworthy of that great
presence. He had ruled an extensive and populous
country, had made laws and treaties, had sent forth
armies, had set up and pulled down princes. And in
his high place he had so borne himself, that all had
feared him, that most had loved him, and that hatred
itself could deny him no title to glory, except virtue.
He looked like a great man, and not like a bad man.
A person small and emaciated, yet deriving dignity
from a carriage which, while it indicated deference
to the court, indicated also habitual self-possession
and self-respect, a high and intellectual forehead, a
brow pensive, but not gloomy, a mouth of inflexible
decision, a face pale and worn, but serene, on which
was written, as legibly as under the picture in the

647



LORD MACAULAY



council-chamber at Calcutta, Mens aequa in arduis ;
such was the aspect with which the great Proconsul
presented himself to his judges.

Essays

384 Londonderry

IT was the twenty-eighth of July. The sun had just
set : the evening sermon in the cathedral was over ;
and the heartbroken congregation had separated ;
when the sentinels on the tower saw the sails of three
vessels coming up the Foyle. Soon there was a stir
in the Irish camp. The besiegers were on the alert
for miles along both shores. The ships were in
extreme peril : for the river was low ; and the only
navigable channel ran very near to the left bank,
where the headquarters of the enemy had been fixed,
and where the batteries were most numerous. Leake
performed his duty with a skill and spirit worthy of
his noble profession, exposed his frigate to cover the
merchantmen, and used his guns with great effect.
At length the little squadron came to the place of
peril. Then the Mountjoy took the lead, and went
right at the boom. The huge barricade cracked and
gave way : but the shock was such that the Mountjoy
rebounded, and stuck in the mud. A yell of triumph
rose from the banks : the Irish rushed to their boats,
and were preparing to board ; but the Dartmouth
poured on them a well-directed broadside, which
threw them into disorder. Just then the Phoenix
dashed at the breach which the Mountjoy had made,
and was in a moment within the fence. Meantime the
tide was rising fast. The Mountjoy began to move,
and soon passed safe through the broken stakes and
648



LORD MACAULAY

floating spars. But her brave master was no more.
A shot from one of the batteries had struck him ;
and he died by the most enviable of all deaths, in
sight of the city which was his birthplace, which was
his home, and which had just been saved by his
courage and self-devotion from the most frightful
form of destruction. The night had closed in before
the conflict at the boom began : but the flash of the
guns was seen, and the noise heard, by the lean and
ghastly multitude which covered the walls of the city.
When the Mountjoy grounded, and when the shout
of triumph rose from the Irish on both sides of the
river, the hearts of the besieged died within them.
One who endured the unutterable anguish of that
moment has told us that they looked fearfully livid
in each other's eyes. Even after the barricade had
been passed, there was a terrible half hour of suspense.
It was ten o'clock before the ships arrived at the quay.
The whole population was there to welcome them.
A screen made of casks filled with earth was hastily
thrown up to protect the landing place from the
batteries on the other side of the river ; and then
the work of unloading began. First were rolled on
shore barrels containing six thousand bushels of meal.
Then came great cheeses, casks of beef, flitches of
bacon, kegs of butter, sacks of pease and biscuit, ankers
of brandy. Not many hours before, half a pound
of tallow and three quarters of a pound of salted hide
had been weighed out with niggardly care to every
fighting man. The ration which each now received
was three pounds of flour, two pounds of beef, and
a pint of pease. It is easy to imagine with what
tears grace was said over the suppers of that evening.
There was little sleep on either side of the wall. The

649



LORD MACAULAY



bonfires shone bright along the whole circuit of the
ramparts. The Irish guns continued to roar all night ;
and all night the bells of the rescued city made answer
to the Irish guns with a peal of joyous defiance.
Through the three following days the batteries of the
enemy continued to play. But, on the third night,
flames were seen arising from the camp ; and, when
the first of August dawned, a line of smoking ruins
marked the site lately occupied by the huts of the
besiegers ; and the citizens saw far off the long
column of pikes and standards retreating up the left
bank of the Foyle towards Strabane.

So ended this great siege, the most memorable in
the annals of the British Isles. It had lasted a hundred
and five days. The garrison had been reduced from
about seven thousand effective men to about three
thousand. The loss of the besiegers cannot be precisely
ascertained. Walker estimated it at eight thousand
men. It is certain from the despatches of Avaux that
the regiments which returned from the blockade had
been so much thinned that many of them were not
more than two hundred strong. Of thirty-six French
gunners who had superintended the cannonading,
thirty-one had been killed or disabled. The means
both of attack and of defence had undoubtedly been
such as would have moved the great warriors of the
Continent to laughter ; and this is the very circum-
stance which gives so peculiar an interest to the history
of the contest. It was a contest, not between engineers,
but between nations ; and the victory remained with
the nation which, though inferior in number, was
superior in civilization, in capacity for self-government,
and in stubbornness of resolution.

History of England

650



LORD MACAULAY



385 ' *And Calm of mind, all
Passion spent '

IT chanced in the warm and beautiful spring of the
year 1665, a little before the saddest summer that
ever London saw, that I went to the Bowling Green
at Piccadilly, whither at that time the best gentry
made continual resorts. There I met Mr. Cowley,
who had lately left Barnelms. ... I entreated him
to dine with me at my lodging in the Temple, which
he most courteously promised. And that so eminent
a guest might not lack better entertainment than
cooks or vintners can provide, I sent to the house of
Mr. John Milton, in the Artillery Walk, to beg that
he would also be my guest, . . . for I hoped that they
would think themselves rather united by their common
art than divided by their different factions. And so,
indeed, it proved. For while we sat at table they
talked freely of men and things, as well ancient as
modern, with much civility. Nay, Mr. Milton, who
seldom tasted wine, both because of his singular
temperance and because of his gout, did more than
once pledge Mr. Cowley, who was indeed no hermit
in diet. At last, being heated, Mr. Milton begged
that I would open the windows. ' Nay,' said I, ' if
you desire fresh air and coolness, what would hinder
us, as the evening is fair, from sailing for an hour
upon the river? ' To this they both cheerfully con-
sented ; and forth we walked, Mr. Cowley and I
leading Mr. Milton between us to the Temple Stairs.
There we took a boat, and thence we were rowed up
the river.

The wind was pleasant, the evening fine ; the sky,

65'



LORD MACAULAY



the earth, and the water beautiful to look upon.

But Mr. Cowley and I held our peace, and said

nothing of the gay sights around us, lest we should

too feelingly remind Mr. Milton of his calamity,

whereof, however, he needed no monitor ; for soon he

said sadly : ' Ah, Mr. Cowley, you are a happy man.

What would I now give but for one more look at the

sun, and the waters, and the gardens of this fair city ! '

A Conversation between Mr. Abraham Cowley
and Mr, John Milton



JOHN HENRY, CARDINAL NEWMAN

1801-1890

386 oAthens, the Sye of Qreece

MANY a more fruitful coast or isle is washed by the
blue Aegean, many a spot is there more beautiful
or sublime to see, many a territory more ample ; but
there was one charm in Attica, which in the same
perfection was nowhere else. The deep pastures of
Arcadia, the plain of Argos, the Thessalian vale, these
had not the gift ; Bceotia, which lay to its immediate
north, was notorious for its very want of it. The
heavy atmosphere of that Boeotia might be good for
vegetation, but it was associated in popular belief
with the dulness of the Boeotian intellect : on the
contrary, the special purity, elasticity, clearness, and
salubrity of the air of Attica, fit concomitant and
emblem of its genius, did that for it which earth did
not ; — it brought out every bright hue and tender
shade of the landscape over which it was spread, and
would have illuminated the face even of a more bare
and rugged country.
652



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN

A confined triangle, perhaps fifty miles its greatest
length, and thirty its greatest breadth ; two elevated
rocky barriers, meeting at an angle ; three prominent
mountains, commanding the plain, — Parnes, Penteli-
cus, and Hymettus ; an unsatisfactory soil ; some
streams, not always full ; — such is about the report
which the agent of a London company would have
made of Attica. He would report that the climate
was mild ; the hills were limestone ; there was plenty
of good marble ; more pasture land than at first
survey might have been expected, sufficient certainly
for sheep and goats ; fisheries productive ; silver
mines once, but long since worked out ; figs fair ; oil
first-rate ; olives in profusion. But what he would
not think of noting down, was, that that olive tree was
so choice in nature and so noble in shape, that it
excited a religious veneration ; and that it took so
kindly to the light soil, as to expand into woods upon
the open plain, and to climb up and fringe the hills.
He would not think of writing word to his employers,
how that clear air, of which I have spoken, brought
out, yet blended and subdued, the colours on the
marble, till they had a softness and harmony, for all
their richness, which in a picture looks exaggerated,
yet is after all within the truth. He would not tell,
how that same delicate and brilliant atmosphere
freshened up the pale olive, till the olive forgot its
monotony, and its cheek glowed like the arbutus or
beech of the Umbrian hills. He would say nothing
of the thyme and thousand fragrant herbs which
carpeted Hymettus ; he would hear nothing of the
hum of its bees ; nor take much account of the rare
flavour of its honey, since Gozo and Minorca were
sufficient for the English demand. He would look

653



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN

over the Aegean from the height he had ascended ;
he would follow with his eye the chain of islands,
which, starting from the Sunian headland, seemed to
offer the fabled divinities of Attica, when they would
visit their Ionian cousins, a sort of viaduct thereto
across the sea : but that fancy would not occur to
him, nor any admiration of the dark violet billows
with their white edges down below ; nor of those
graceful, fan-like jets of silver upon the rocks, which
slowly rise aloft like water spirits from the deep, then
shiver, and break, and spread, and shroud themselves,
and disappear, in a soft mist of foam ; nor of the
gentle, incessant heaving and panting of the whole
liquid plain ; nor of the long waves, keeping steady
time, like a line of soldiery, as they resound upon the
hollow shore, — he would not deign to notice that
restless living element at all, except to bless his stars that
he was not upon it. Nor the distinct detail, nor the
refined colouring, nor the graceful outline and roseate
golden hue of the jutting crags, nor the bold shadows
cast from Otus or Laurium by the declining sun ; — ■
our agent of a mercantile firm would not value these
matters even at a low figure. Rather we must turn
for the sympathy we seek to yon pilgrim student, come
from a semi-barbarous land to that small corner of
the earth, as to a shrine, where he might take his
fill of gazing on those emblems and coruscations of
invisible unoriginate perfection. It was the stranger
from a remote province, from Britain or from Mauri-
tania, who in a scene so different from that of his
chilly, woody swamps, or of his fiery choking sands,
learned at once what a real University must be, by
coming to understand the sort of country, which was
its suitable home. Historical Sketches

654



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN



387 The Classics

IET us consider, too, how differently young and old
j are affected by the words of some classic author,
such as Homer or Horace. Passages, which to a boy
are but rhetorical common-places, neither better nor
worse than a hundred others which any clever writer
might supply, which he gets by heart and thinks very
fine, and imitates, as he thinks, successfully, in his
own flowing versification, at length come home to
him, when long years have passed, and he has had
experience of life, and pierce him, as if he had never
known them, with their sad earnestness and vivid
exactness. Then he comes to understand how it is
that lines, the birth of some chance morning or
evening at an Ionian festival, or among the Sabine
hills, have lasted generation after generation, for
thousands of years, with a power over the mind, and
a charm, which the current literature of his own day,
with all its obvious advantages, is utterly unable to
rival. Perhaps this is the reason of the mediaeval
opinion about Virgil, as of a prophet or magician;
his single words and phrases, his pathetic half lines,
giving utterance, as the voice of Nature herself, to
that pain and weariness, yet hope of better things,
which is the experience of her children in every time.

Grammar of Assent

388 Definition of a Gentleman

HENCE it is, that it is almost a definition of a
gentleman, to say he is one who never inflicts
pain. This description is both refined and, as far as
it goes, accurate. He is mainly occupied in merely

'ess



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN

removing the obstacles which hinder the free and
unembarrassed action of those about him ; and he
concurs with their movements rather than takes the
initiative himself. His benefits may be considered
as parallel to what are called comforts or conveniences
in arrangements of a personal nature : like an easy
chair or a good fire, which do their part in dispelling
cold and fatigue, though nature provides both means
of rest and animal heat without them. The true
gentleman in like manner carefully avoids whatever
may cause a jar or a jolt in the minds of those with
whom he is cast ; — all clashing of opinion, or collision
of feeling, all restraint, or suspicion, or gloom, or
resentment ; his great concern being to make every
one at their ease and at home. He has his eyes on all
his company ; he is tender towards the bashful,
gentle towards the distant, and merciful towards the
absurd ; he can recollect to whom he is speaking ; he
guards against unseasonable allusions, or topics which
may irritate ; he is seldom prominent in conversation,
and never wearisome. He makes light of favours
while he does them, and seems to be receiving when he
is conferring. He never speaks of himself except when
compelled, never defends himself by a mere retort,
he has no ears for slander or gossip, is scrupulous in
imputing motives to those who interfere with him,
and interprets everything for the best. He is never
mean or little in his disputes, never takes unfair
advantage, never mistakes personalities or sharp
sayings for arguments, or insinuates evil which he
dare not say out. From a long-sighted prudence, he
observes the maxim of the ancient sage, that we should
ever conduct ourselves towards our enemy as if he
were one day to be our friend. He has too much good
656



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN

sense to be affronted at insults, he is too well employed
to remember injuries, and too indolent to bear malice.
He is patient, forbearing, and resigned, on philosophical
principles ; he submits to pain, because it is inevitable,
to bereavement, because it is irreparable, and to death,
because it is his destiny. If he engages in controversy
of any kind, his disciplined intellect preserves him from
the blundering discourtesy of better, though less edu-
cated minds ; who, like blunt weapons, tear and hack
instead of cutting clean, who mistake the point in
argument, waste their strength on trifles, misconceive
their adversary, and leave the question more involved
than they find it. He may be right or wrong in his
opinion, but he is too clear-headed to be unjust ; he
is as simple as he is forcible, and as brief as he is
decisive.

Idea of a University

389 Leaving Oxford

I LEFT Oxford for good on Monday, February 23,
1846. On the Saturday and Sunday before, I was
in my House at Littlemore simply by myself, as I had
been for the first day or two when I had originally
taken possession of it. I slept on Sunday night at
my dear friend's, Mr. Johnson's, at the Observatory.
Various friends came to see the last of me ; Mr. Cope-
land, Mr. Church, Mr. Buckle, Mr. Pattison, and
Mr. Lewis. Dr. Pusey too came up to take leave of
me ; and I called on Dr. Ogle, one of my very oldest
friends, for he was my private Tutor, when I was an
Undergraduate. In him I took leave of my first
College, Trinity, which was so dear to me, and which
held on its foundation so many who have been kind

657



JOHN HENRY NEWMAN

to me both when I was a boy, and all through my
Oxford life. Trinity had never been unkind to me.
There used to be much snap-dragon growing on the
walls opposite my freshman's rooms there, and I had
for years taken it as the emblem of my own perpetual
residence even unto death in my University.

On the morning of the 23rd I left the Observatory.
I have never seen Oxford since, excepting its spires,
as they are seen from the railway.

Apologia pro Vita Sua

HUGH MILLER

1802-1856

390 His First Day as Quarry-Hoy

IT was twenty years last February since I set out,
a little before sunrise, to make my first acquaintance
with a life of labour and restraint ; and I have rarely
had a heavier heart than on that morning. I was but
a slim, loose-jointed boy at the time, fond of the
pretty intangibilities of romance, and of dreaming
when broad awake ; and, woful change ! I was now
going to work at what Burns has instanced, in his
' Twa Dogs ', as one of the most disagreeable of all
employments, — to work in a quarry. Bating the passing
uneasinesses occasioned by a few gloomy anticipations,
the portion of my life which had already gone by had
been happy beyond the common lot. I had been
a wanderer among rocks and woods, a reader of curious
books when I could get them, a gleaner of old tradition-
ary stories ; and now I was going to exchange all my
day-dreams, and all my amusements, for the kind of
life in which men toil every day that they may be
658



HUGH MILLER



enabled to eat, and eat every day that they may be
enabled to toil !

The quarry in which I wrought lay on the southern
shore of a noble inland bay, or frith rather, with
a little clear stream on the one side, and a thick fir
wood on the other. It had been opened in the Old
Red Sandstone of the district, and was overtopped by
a huge bank of diluvial clay, which rose over it in some
places to the height of nearly thirty feet, and which
at this time was rent and shivered, wherever it pre-
sented an open front to the weather, by a recent frost.
A heap of loose fragments, which had fallen from
above, blocked up the face of the quarry and my first
employment was to clear them away. The friction of
the shovel soon blistered my hands, but the pain was
by no means very severe, and I wrought hard and
willingly, that I might see how the huge strata below,
which presented so firm and unbroken a frontage, were
to be torn up and removed. Picks, and wedges, and
levers, were applied by my brother-workmen ; and,
simple and rude as I had been accustomed to regard
these implements, I found I had much to learn in
the way of using them. They all proved inefficient,
however, and the workmen had to bore into one of
the inferior strata, and employ gunpowder. The
process was new to me, and I deemed it a highly
amusing one : it had the merit, too, of being attended
with some such degree of danger as a boating or rock
excursion, and had thus an interest independent of
its novelty. We had a few capital shots : the fragments
flew in every direction ; and an immense mass of the
diluvium came toppling down, bearing with it two
dead birds, that in a recent storm had crept into one
of the deeper fissures, to die in the shelter. I felt a new

659



HUGH MILLER



interest in examining them. The one was a pretty
cock goldfinch, with its hood of vermilion and its
wings inlaid with the gold to which it owes its name,
as unsoiled and smooth as if it had been preserved for
a museum. The other, a somewhat rarer bird, of the
woodpecker tribe, was variegated with light blue and
a grayish yellow. I was engaged in admiring the poor
little things, more disposed to be sentimental, perhaps,
than if I had been ten years older, and thinking of
the contrast between the warmth and jollity of their
green summer haunts, and the cold and darkness of
their last retreat, when I heard our employer bidding
the workmen lay by their tools. I looked up and saw
the sun sinking behind the thick fir wood beside us,
and the long dark shadows of the trees stretching
downward towards the shore.

Old Red Sandstone

ROBERT SMITH SURTEES

i 803-1864

391 <SMr. Jorrocksy ^M.F.H., arrives at
Handley Cross

THE clear bright beauty of the day, combined with
the attraction of a stranger coming to fill so im-
portant a situation as master of fox-hounds, drew many
to the Datton railway station who were previously
unacquainted even with the name of ' Jorrocks '. . .

All the flys, hack horses, donkeys, and ponies, were
bespoke as usual ; and many set out at noon to secure
good berths at the station. . . Precisely at three-quarters
of a minute before three, a wild shrill whistle, that
seemed to issue from the bowels of the earth and to
run right up into mid-air, was heard at the back of
660



ROBERT SMITH SURTEES

Shavington Hill, and, in an instant, the engine and long
train rounded the base, the engine smoking and
snorting like an exasperated crocodile. Nearer and
nearer it comes with a thundering sort of hum that
sounds throughout the country. The wondering
ploughman stops his team. The cows and sheep stand
staring with astonishment, while the horses take a look,
and then gallop about the fields, kicking up their
heels and snorting with delight. The guard's red coat
on the engine is visible — next his gold hatband appears
— now we read the ' Hercules ' on the engine, and anon
it pulls up with a whiff, a puff, and a whistle, under the
slate-covered shed, to give the Hercules his water, and
set down and take up passengers and goods. Seven
first-class passenger carriages follow the engine, all
smart, clean, and yellow, with appropriate names on
each door panel — The Prince Albert, Queen Victoria,
and the Prince of Wales, The Venus, The Mercury,
The Comet, and The Star ; next come ten second-
class ones, green, with covered tops and half-covered
sides, but in neither set is there anything at all like
the Jorrocks party. Cattle-pens follow, holding sheep,
swine, donkeys, and poultry ; then come an open
platform with a broken britzka, followed by a curious
looking nondescript one horse vehicle, containing a fat
man in a low-crowned hat, and a versatio or reversible
coat, with the preferable side outwards. Along with
him were two ladies muffled up in cloaks, and at the
back was a good looking servant-maid. From the
bottom of the carriage swung a couple of hams, and
a large warming pan. ' Pray is Mr. Jorrocks here 1 '
inquired the elegant M.C., who had persuaded the
station-master to let him in upon the line, riding his
white charger near the door of the first-class carriage,

661



ROBERT SMITH SURTEES



and raising his hat as he spoke ; but getting no answer,
he continued his interrogatory down the whole set
until he came to the end, when casting a despairing
glance at the cattle pens, he was about to wheel round,
when the gentlemen in the versatio coat, in a very
stentorian voice, roared out, ' I say, Sir ! Bain't this
the 'Andley Cross station f ' 'It is, Sir,' replied
Captain Doleful, in his most dignified manner, ' The
Datton station for Handley Cross at least.'

' Then I want to land,' responded the same sweet
voice.

' Here 's a gentleman wants to be down,' observed
Captain Doleful to the scarlet-coated guard, who came
bustling past with a pen of Cochin-Chinas to put
upon the train.

' Yes, a gentleman and two ladies,' roared our
friend ; ' Mister and Missis Jorrocks in fact, and
Miss Jorrocks ! ' . .

Thereupon the Captain beckoned the guard, and
Mr. Jorrocks, standing up in the vehicle, looking very
like a hay-stack with a hat on the top, bounded to the
ground. Mrs. Jorrocks, in a black velvet bonnet lined
with pink satin, and her body all shrouded in a sea
green silk cloak, then accepted the offer of the Captain's
arm, and descended with caution and due state while
Belinda, with the spring of youth and elasticity in
her limbs, bounded on to the foot-way beyond the
rail. Benjamin, who was asleep in the horse-box,
being considerately kicked awake by Mr. Jorrocks, the
porters cut off the last joints of the train, when away
it went, hissing and snorting through the quiet
country, leaving our party to the undisturbed observa-
tion of the Handley Cross company.

Handley Cross

662



ROBERT SMITH SURTEES



39 2 A Morning Find

' T~*\ ASH it, wot a mornin' it is ! ' exclaimed
.L/ Mr. Jorrocks, turning up his jolly face, beaming
With exultation ; ' wot a many delicious moments one
loses by smooterin i' bed ! — dash my vig ! if I won't
get up at five every mornin' as long as I live ! Glad
I've got on my cords 'stead o' my shags, for it 's goin'
to be werry 'ot,' continued he, looking down on a pair
of second or third-hand whites. ' Yooi over, in there ! '
to the hounds, with a wave of his hand, as Pigg's horn
announced he had taken his station.

In the hounds flew, with a chirp and a whimper ;
and the crack of Pigg's whip on the far side sounded
like a gun in the silence around. ' Yooi, spread and
try for him, my beauties ! ' holloaed Mr. Jorrocks,
riding into cover among the stunted underwood.
The pack spread, and try in all directions — now here,
now there, now whiffing with curious nose round the
hollies, and now trying up the rides.

' There 's a touch of a fox,' said Mr. Jorrocks to
himself, as Priestess put her nose to the ground, and
ran mute across the road, lashing her sides with her
stern. A gentle whimper followed, and Mr. Jorrocks
cheered her to the echo. ' The warmint's a-stir,' said
he ; ' that's jest where we hit on him last time.' Now
Priestess speaks again in fuller and deeper notes, and
Ravager and Lavender, and the rest of the pack rush
to the spot. How beautifully they flourish — eager,
and yet none will go an inch without the scent. ' Veil
done, old 'ooman ! speak to him again ! ' exclaimed
Mr. Jorrocks, delighted to hear the old bitch's tongue ;
' a fox for a pund ; ten if you like ! '

Handley Cross
663



GEORGE BORROW

1803-1881

393 The Wind on the Heath

I NOW wandered along the heath, till I came to
a place where, beside a thick furze, sat a man, his
eyes fixed intently on the red ball of the setting sun.
' That's not you, Jasper ? '
' Indeed, brother ! '
' I've not seen you for years.'
' How should you, brother f '
' What brings you here f '
' The fight, brother.'
' Where are the tents f '
' On the old spot, brother.'
' Any news since we parted ? '
' Two deaths, brother.'
' Who are dead, Jasper f '
' Father and mother, brother.' . .
' Where did they die ? '
' Where they were sent, brother.'
' What is your opinion of death, Mr. Petulengro ? '
said I, as I sat down beside him.

' My opinion of death, brother, is much the same as
that in the old song of Pharaoh, which I have heard my
grandam sing : —

Cana marel manus chivios ande puv,
Ta rovel pa leste o chavo ta romi.

When a man dies, he is cast into the earth, and his wife
and child sorrow over him. If he has neither wife nor
child, then his father and mother, I suppose ; and if
he is quite alone in the world, why, then, he is cast
into the earth, and there is an end of the matter.'
' And do you think that is the end of man ? '
664



GEORGE BORROW



' There's an end of him, brother, more's the pity.'
' Why do you say so ? '
' Life is sweet, brother.'
' Do you think so ? '

' Think so ! There's night and day, brother, both
sweet things ; sun, moon, and stars, brother, all sweet
things ; there's likewise a wind on the heath. Life is
very sweet, brother ; who would wish to die ? '

' I would wish to die '

' You talk like a Gorgio — which is the same as talking
like a fool. Were you a Romany Chal, you would talk
wiser. Wish to die, indeed ! A Romany Chal would
wish to live for ever ! '

' In sickness, Jasper ? '

' There's the sun and stars, brother.'

' In blindness, Jasper ? '

' There's the wind on the heath, brother ; if I could
only feel that, I would gladly live for ever. Dosta,
we'll now go to the tents and put on the gloves ; and
I'll try to make you feel what a sweet thing it is to be
alive, brother.'

Lavengro

394 T"he Trize Fight

IET no one sneer at the bruisers of England. What
j were the gladiators of Rome, or the bull-fighters
of Spain, in its palmiest days, compared to England's
bruisers ? Pity that ever corruption should have
crept in amongst them — but of that I wish not to
talk ; let us still hope that a spark of the old religion,
of which they were the priests, still lingers in the
breasts of Englishmen. There they come, the bruisers,
far from London, or from wherever else they might

665



GEORGE BORROW



chance to be at that time, to the great rendezvous in
the old city. Some came one way, some another :
some of tip-top reputation came with peers in their
chariots, for glory and fame are such fair things, that
even peers are proud to have those invested therewith
by their sides : others came in their own gigs, driving
their own bits of blood, and I heard one say : ' I have
driven through at a heat the whole hundred and
eleven miles, and only stopped to bait twice.' Oh,
the blood-horses of old England ! But they too have
had their day — for everything beneath the sun there
is a season and a time. But the greater number come
just as they can contrive — on the tops of coaches, for
example — and amongst these there are fellows with
dark sallow faces, and sharp shining eyes ; and it is
these that have planted rottenness in the core of
pugilism, for they are Jews, and, true to their kind,
have only base lucre in view. . .

So the bruisers of England are come to be present
at the grand fight speedily coming off ; there they are
met in the precincts of the old town, near the field of
the chapel, planted with tender saplings at the
restoration of sporting Charles, which are now become
venerable elms as high as many a steeple. There they
are met at a fitting rendezvous, where a retired coach-
man, with one leg, keeps an hotel and a bowling-green.
I think I now see them upon the bowling-green, the
men of renown, amidst hundreds of people with no
renown at all, who gaze upon them with timid wonder.
Fame, after all, is a glorious thing, though it lasts only
for a day. There 's Cribb, the champion of England,
and perhaps the best man in England ; there he is,
with his huge, massive figure, and face wonderfully
like that of a lion. There is Belcher, the younger, not
666



GEORGE BORROW



the mighty one, who is gone to his place, but the
Teucer Belcher, the most scientific pugilist that ever
entered a ring, only wanting strength to be, I won't
say what. He appears to walk before me now, as he
did that evening, with his white hat, white great-
coat, thin genteel figure, springy step, and keen,
determined eye. Crosses him, what a contrast ! grim,
savage Shelton, who has a civil word for nobody, and
a hard blow for anybody — hard ! one blow, given with
the proper play of his athletic arm, will unsense a
giant. Yonder individual, who strolls about with his
hands behind him, supporting his brown coat lappets,
under-sized, and who looks anything but what he is,
is the king of the light weights, so called — Randall !
the terrible Randall, who has Irish blood in his veins —
not the better for that, nor the worse ; and not far
from him is his last antagonist, Ned Turner, who,
though beaten by him, still thinks himself as good a man,
in which he is, perhaps, right, for it was a near thing ;
and ' a better shentleman,' in which he is quite right,
for he is a Welshman. But how shall I name them all ?
They were there by dozens, and all tremendous in
their way. There was Bulldog Hudson, and fearless
Scroggins, who beat the conqueror of Sam the Jew.
There was Black Richmond — no, he was not there,
but I knew him well ; he was the most dangerous of
blacks, even with a broken thigh. There was Purcell,
who could never conquer till all seemed over with
him. There was — what ! shall I name thee last r
ay, why not? I believe that thou art the last of all
that strong family still above the sod, where mayest
thou long continue — true piece of English stuff, Tom
of Bedford — sharp as winter, kind as spring.

Hail to thee, Tom of Bedford, or by whatever name

667



GEORGE BORROW



it may please thee to be called, Spring or Winter.
Hail to thee, six-foot Englishman of the brown eye,
worthy to have carried a six-foot bow at Flodden,
where England's yeomen triumphed over Scotland's
king, his clans and chivalry. Hail to thee, last of
England's bruisers, after all the many victories which
thou hast achieved — true English victories, unbought
by yellow gold ; need I recount them ? Nay, nay !
they are already well known to fame — sufficient to
say that Bristol's Bull and Ireland's Champion were
vanquished by thee, and one mightier still, gold itself,
thou didst overcome ; for gold itself strove in vain to
deaden the power of thy arm ; and thus thou didst
proceed till men left off challenging thee, the un-
vanquishable, the incorruptible. 'Tis a treat to see
thee, Tom of Bedford, in thy ' public ' in Holborn
way, whither thou hast retired with thy well-earned
bays. 'Tis Friday night, and nine by Holborn clock.
There sits the yeoman at the end of his long room,
surrounded by his friends. Glasses are filled, and a song
is the cry, and a song is sung well suited to the place ;
it finds an echo in every heart — fists are clenched, arms
are waved, and the portraits of the mighty fighting
men of yore, Broughton, and Slack, and Ben, which
adorn the walls, appear to smile grim approbation,
whilst many a manly voice joins in the bold chorus :

' Here 's a health to old honest John Bull,
When he's gone we sha'n't find such another,
And with hearts and with glasses brim full,
We will drink to old England, his mother.'

But the fight ! with respect to the fight, what shall
I say ? Little can be said about it — it was soon over.
Some said that the brave from town, who was reputed
the best man of the two, and whose form was a perfect
668



GEORGE BORROW



model of athletic beauty, allowed himself, for lucre
vile, to be vanquished by the massive champion with
the flattened nose. One thing is certain, that the
former was suddenly seen to sink to the earth before
a blow of by no means extraordinary power. Time,
time ! was called, but there he lay upon the ground
apparently senseless, and from thence he did not lift
his head till several seconds after the umpires had
declared his adversary victor

Lavengro

RALPH WALDO EMERSON

i 803-1 882

595 The Universal in ^SMan

THERE is one mind common to all individual men.
Every man is an inlet to the same and to all of
the same. He that is once admitted to the right of
reason is made a freeman of the whole estate. What
Plato has thought he may think ; what a saint has felt
he may feel ; what at any time has befallen any man
he can understand. Who hath access to this universal
mind is a party to all that is or can be done, for this
is the only and sovereign agent. . .

Of the universal mind each individual man is one
more incarnation. All its properties consist in him.
Each new fact in his private experience flashes a light
on what great bodies of men have done, and the crises
of his life refer to national crises. Every revolution
was first a thought in one man's mind, and when the
same thought occurs to another man it is the key to
that era. Every reform was once a private opinion,
and when it shall be a private opinion again it will
solve the problem of the age. . .

669



RALPH WALDO EMERSON

It is remarkable that involuntarily we always read
as superior beings. Universal history, the poets, the
romancers, do not in their stateliest pictures — in the
sacerdotal, the imperial palaces, in the triumphs of
will or of genius — anywhere lose our ear, anywhere
make us feel that we intrude, that this is for better
men ; but rather is it true, that in their grandest
strokes we feel most at home. All that Shakespeare
says of the king, yonder slip of a boy that reads in the
corner feels to be true of himself. We sympathize
in the great moments of history, in the great discoveries,
the great resistances, the great prosperities of men ; —
because there law was enacted, the sea was searched,
the land was found, or the blow was struck for us, as
we ourselves in that place would have done or ap-
plauded. . .

A true aspirant, therefore, never needs look for
allusions personal and laudatory in discourse. He hears
the commendation, not of himself, but more sweet, of
that character he seeks, in every word that is said
concerning character, yea, further, in every fact and
circumstance — in the running river and the rustling
corn. Praise is looked, homage tendered, love flows
from mute nature, from the mountains and the lights
of the firmament.

Essays : History

396 aA Defence of Frankness

SOME of my friends have complained that we
discussed Fate, Power, and Wealth on too low a
platform ; gave too much line to the evil spirit of the
times ; too many cakes to Cerberus ; that we ran Cud-
worth's risk of making, by excess of candour, the argu-
670



RALPH WALDO EMERSON

ment of atheism so strong, that he could not answer
it. I have no fears of being forced in my own despite
to play, as we say, the devil's attorney. I have no
infirmity of faith ; no belief that it is of much impor-
tance what I or any man may say : I am sure that
a certain truth will be said through me, though I
should be dumb, or though I should try to say the
reverse. Nor do I fear scepticism for any good soul.
A just thinker will allow full swing to his scepticism.
I dip my pen in the blackest ink, because I am not
afraid of falling into my inkpot. I have no sympathy
with a poor man I knew, who, when suicides abounded,
told me he dared not look at his razor. We are of
different opinions at different hours, but we always
may be said to be at heart on the side of truth.

I see not why we should give ourselves such sanctified
airs. If the Divine Providence has hid from men
neither disease, nor deformity, nor corrupt society,
but has stated itself out in passions, in war, in trade,
in the love of power and pleasure, in hunger and need,
in tyrannies, literatures, and arts, — let us not be so
nice that we cannot write these facts down coarsely as
they stand, or doubt but there is a counter-statement
as ponderous, which we can arrive at, and which,
being put, will make all square. The solar system has
no anxiety about its reputation, and the credit of
truth and honesty is as safe ; nor have I any fear that
a sceptical bias can be given by leaning hard on the
sides of fate, of practical power, or of trade, which the
doctrine of Faith cannot down-weigh. The strength
of that principle is not measured in ounces and pounds :
it tyrannizes at the centre of Nature.

Conduct of Life : Worship



67 1



BENJAMIN DISRAELI, EARL OF
BEACONSFIELD

1804-1881

397 <tA Fisher of ^Men

IT is proverbial to what drowning men will cling.
Lothair, in his utter hopelessness, made a distinc-
tion between the Cardinal and the conspirators. The
Cardinal had been absent from Rome during the
greater portion of the residence of Lothair in that
city. The Cardinal was his father's friend, an Eng-
lish gentleman, with an English education, once an
Anglican, a man of the world, a man of honour, a good,
kind-hearted man. Lothair explained the apparent
and occasional co-operation of his Eminence with the
others, by their making use of him without a due
consciousness of their purpose on his part. Lothair
remembered how delicately his former guardian had
always treated the subject of religion in their conversa-
tions. The announcement of his visit instead of
aggravating the distresses of Lothair, seemed, as all
these considerations rapidly occurred to him, almost
to impart a ray of hope.

' I see,' said the Cardinal, as he entered serene and
graceful as usual, and glancing at the table, ' that you
have been reading the account of our great act of
yesterday.'

' Yes ; and I have been reading it,' said Lothair
reddening, ' with indignation ; with alarm ; I should
add, with disgust.'

' How is this ? ' said the Cardinal, feeling or affecting
surprise.

' It is a tissue of falsehood and imposture,' continued
Lothair ; ' and I will take care that my opinion is
known of it.'



672



EARL OF BEACONSFIELD



' Do nothing rashly,' said the Cardinal. ' This is
an official journal, and I have reason to believe that



considered, by truly pious men.'

' You yourself, sir, must know,' continued Lothair,
' that the whole of this statement is founded on false-
hood.'

' Indeed I should be sorry to believe,' said the
Cardinal, ' that there was a particle of misstatement, or
even exaggeration, either in the base or the super-
structure of the narrative.'

' Good God ! ' exclaimed Lothair. ' Why ! take
the very first allegation, that I fell at Mentana fighting
in the ranks of the Holy Father. Every one knows
that I fell fighting against him, and that I was almost
slain by one of his chassepots. It is notorious ; and
though, as a matter of taste, I have not obtruded
the fact in the society in which I have been recently
living, I have never attempted to conceal it, and have
not the slightest doubt that it must be as familiar
to every member of that society as to your Eminence.'

' I know there are two narratives of your relations
with the battle of Mentana,' observed the Cardinal
quietly. 4 The one accepted as authentic is that which
appears in this journal ; the other account, which can
only be traced to yourself, bears no doubt a somewhat
different character ; but considering that it is in the
highest degree improbable, and that there is not
a tittle of confirmatory or collateral evidence to extenu-
ate its absolute unlikelihood, I hardly think you are
justified in using, with reference to the statement
in this article, the harsh expression which I am
persuaded, on reflection, you will feel you have hastily
used.'

2830 z 673



nothing




it which is not drawn up, or well



BENJAMIN DISRAELI

' I think,' said Lothair with a kindling eye and a
burning cheek, ' that I am the best judge of what I did
at Mentana.'

' Well, well,' said the Cardinal with dulcet calmness,
' you naturally think so ; but you must remember you
have been very ill, my dear young friend, and labouring
under much excitement. If I were you, and I speak
as your friend, I hope your best one, I would not
dwell too much on this fancy of yours about the battle
of Mentana. I would myself always deal tenderly with
a fixed idea : harsh attempts to terminate halluci-
nation are seldom successful. Nevertheless, in the
case of a public event, a matter of fact, if a man
finds that he is of one opinion and all orders of society
of another, he should not be encouraged to dwell on
a perverted view ; he should be gradually weaned
from it.'

' You amaze me ! ' said Lothair.

' Not at all,' said the Cardinal. ' I am sure you will
benefit by my advice. And you must already perceive
that, assuming the interpretation which the world
without exception places on your conduct in the field
to be the just one, there really is not a single circum-
stance in the whole of this interesting and important
statement, the accuracy of which you yourself would
for a moment dispute.'

' What is there said about me at Mentana makes me
doubt of all the rest,' said Lothair.

' Well, we will not dwell on Mentana,' said the
Cardinal with a sweet smile ; ' I have treated of that
point. Your case is by no means an uncommon one.
It will wear off with returning health. King George IV
believed that he was at the battle of Waterloo, and
indeed commanded there ; and his friends were at
674



EARL OF BEACONSFIELD

one time a little alarmed ; but Knighton, who was
a sensible man, said, " His Majesty has only to leave
off Curacoa, and rest assured he will gain no more
victories." '

Lothair

NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

i 804- i 864

395 T'/iceSe's 'Bedchamber

PHCEBE PYNCHEON slept, on the night of her
arrival, in a chamber that looked down on the
garden of the old house. It fronted towards the east,
so that at a very seasonable hour a glow of crimson
light came flooding through the window, and bathed
the dingy ceiling and paper-hangings in its own hue.
There were curtains to Phoebe's bed ; a dark, antique
canopy and ponderous festoons, of a stuff which had
been rich, and even magnificent, in its time ; but which
now brooded over the girl like a cloud, making a night
in that one corner, while elsewhere it was beginning
to be day. The morning light, however, soon stole
into the aperture at the foot of the bed, betwixt those
faded curtains. Finding the new guest there, — with
a bloom on her cheeks like the morning's own, and
a gentle stir of departing slumber in her limbs, as when
an early breeze moves the foliage, — the dawn kissed
her brow. It was the caress which a dewy maiden —
such as the Dawn is, immortally — gives to her sleeping
sister, partly from the impulse of irresistible fondness,
and partly as a pretty hint that it is time now to
unclose her eyes.

At the touch of those lips of light, Phoebe quietly
awoke, and, for a moment, did not recognize where

6 7S



NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE



she was, nor how those heavy curtains chanced to-be
festooned around her. Nothing, indeed, was absolutely
plain to her, except that it was now early morning,
and that, whatever might happen next, it was proper,
first of all, to get up and say her prayers. She was
the more inclined to devotion, from the grim aspect
of the chamber and its furniture, especially the tall
stiff chairs ; one of which stood dose by her bedside,
and looked as if some old-fashioned personage had
been sitting there all night, and had vanished only
just in season to escape discovery.

When Phoebe was quite dressed, she peeped out of
the window, and saw a rose-bush in the garden. Being
a very tall one, and of luxurious growth, it had been
propped up against the side of the house, and was
literally covered with a rare and very beautiful species
of white rose. . . Hastening down the creaking and
carpetless staircase, she found her way into the garden,
gathered some of the most perfect of the roses, and
brought them to her chamber.

Little Phoebe was one of those persons who possess,
as their exclusive patrimony, the gift of practical
arrangement. It is a kind of natural magic that
enables these favoured ones to bring out the hidden
capabilities of things around them ; and particularly
to give a look of comfort and habitableness to any
place which, for however brief a period, may happen
to be their home. A wild hut of underbrush, tossed
together by wayfarers through the primitive forest,
would acquire the home aspect by one night's lodging
of such a woman, and would retain it long after her
quiet figure had disappeared into the surrounding
shade. No less a portion of such homely witchcraft
was requisite, to reclaim, as it were, Phoebe's waste,
676



NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE



cheerless, and dusky chamber, which had been un-
tenanted so long — except by spiders, and mice, and
rats, and ghosts — that it was all overgrown with
the desolation which watches to obliterate every
trace of man's happier hours. What was precisely
Phoebe's process, we find it impossible to say. She
appeared to have no preliminary design, but gave
a touch here and another there ; brought some
articles of furniture to light, and dragged others into
the shadow ; looped up or let down a window-curtain ;
and, in the course of half an hour, had fully succeeded
in throwing a kindly and hospitable smile over the
apartment.

House of the Seven Gables

CHARLES LEVER

1806-1872

399 With the Qa/way Hunt

BY the time that we reached the foot of the hill,
the fox, followed closely by the hounds, had
passed through a breach in the wall, while Matthew
Blake, with the huntsmen and whipper-in, were riding
along in search of a gap to lead the horses through.
Before I put spurs to Badger, to face the hill, I turned
one look towards Hammersley. There was a slight
curl, half-smile, half-sneer upon his lip, that actually
maddened me, and had a precipice yawned beneath
my feet, I should have dashed at it after that. The
ascent was so steep that I was obliged to take the hill
in a slanting direction, and even thus, the loose footing
rendered it dangerous in the extreme. At length
I reached the crest, where the wall, more than five
feet in height, stood frowning above and seeming to

677



CHARLES LEVER



defy me. I turned my horse full round, so that his
very chest almost touched the stones, and, with a bold
cut of the whip and a loud halloo, the gallant animal
rose, as if rearing, pawed for an instant to regain his
balance, and then with a frightful struggle fell back-
wards, and rolled from top to bottom of the hill,
carrying me along with him ; the last object that
crossed my sight, as I lay bruised and motionless, being
the captain as he took the wall in a flying leap, and
disappeared at the other side. After a few scrambling
efforts to rise, Badger regained his legs, and stood
beside me ; but such was the shock and concussion
of my fall, that all the objects around seemed wavering
and floating before me, while showers of bright sparks
fell in myriads before my eyes. I tried to rise, but fell
back helpless. Cold perspiration broke over my fore-
head, and I fainted. From that moment I can
remember nothing, till I felt myself galloping along
at full speed upon a level table land, with the hounds
about three fields in advance, Hammersley riding
foremost, and taking all his leaps coolly as ever. As
I swayed to either side upon my saddle, from weakness,
I was lost to all thought or recollection, save a flickering
memory of some plan of vengeance, which still urged
me forward. The chase had now lasted above an
hour, and both hounds and horses began to feel the
pace at which they were going. As for me, I rode
mechanically ; I neither knew nor cared for the
dangers before me. My eye rested on but one object ;
my whole being was concentrated upon one vague
and undetermined sense of revenge. At this instant
the huntsman came alongside of me.

' Are you hurted, Misther Charles ? did you fall f —
your cheek is all blood, and your coat is torn in two ;
678



CHARLES LEVER

and, Mother o' God, his boot is ground to powder ;
he does not hear me. Oh, pull up — pull, for the love
of the Virgin ; there 's the clover field, and the sunk
fence before you, and you'll be killed on the spot.' . .

I dashed the rowels into my horse's flanks, and in an
instant was beyond the reach of the poor fellow's
remonstrances. Another moment, I was beside the
captain. He turned round as I came up ; the same
smile was upon his mouth— I could have struck him.
About three hundred yards before us lay the sunk fence ;
its breadth was about twenty feet, and a wall of close
brickwork formed its face. Over this the hounds were
now clambering; some succeeded in crossing, but by
far the greater number fell back howling into the ditch.

I turned towards Hammersley. He was standing
high in his stirrups, and, as he looked towards the
yawning fence, down which the dogs were tumbling
in masses, I thought (perhaps it was but a thought)
that his cheek was paler. I looked again, he was
pulling at his horse ; ha ! it was true then, he would
not face it. I turned round in my saddle — looked him
full in the face, and, as I pointed with my whip to the
leap, called out in a voice hoarse with passion, ' come
on.' I saw no more. All objects were lost to me from
that moment. When next my senses cleared I was
standing amid the dogs, where they had just killed. . .
I turned a vague look upon him, and my eyes fell upon
the figure of a man that lay stretched and bleeding
upon a door before me. His pale face was crossed
with a purple stream of blood, that trickled from
a wound beside his eye-brow ; his arms lay motionless
and heavily at either side. I knew him not. A loud
report of a pistol aroused me from my stupor ; I
looked back. I saw a crowd that broke suddenly

679



CHARLES LEVER



asunder and fled right and left. I heard a heavy crash
upon the ground; I pointed with my finger, for I could
not utter a word.

' It is the English mare, yer honour ; she was a
beauty this morning, but she 's broke her collar bone,
and both her legs, and it was best to put her out of
pain.'

Charles O'Malky

JOHN STUART MILL

1806-1873

400 Liberty of the Individual

THERE is a sphere of action in which society, as
distinguished from the individual, has, if any,
only an indirect interest ; comprehending all that
portion of a person's life and conduct which affects
only himself, or if it also affects others, only with their
free, voluntary, and undeceived consent and participa-
tion. When I say only himself, I mean directly, and
in the first instance : for whatever affects himself,
may affect others through himself ; and the objection
which may be grounded on this contingency, will
receive consideration in the sequel. This, then, is
the appropriate region of human liberty. It com-
prises, first, the inward domain of consciousness ;
demanding liberty of conscience, in the most compre-
hensive sense ; liberty of thought and feeling ; absolute
freedom of opinion and sentiment on all subjects,
practical or speculative, scientific, moral, or theological.
The liberty of expressing and publishing opinions may
seem to fall under a different principle, since it belongs
to that part of the conduct of an individual which
concerns other people ; but, being almost of as much
680



JOHN STUART MILL

importance as the liberty of thought itself, and resting
in great part on the same reasons, is practically
inseparable from it. Secondly, the principle requires
liberty of tastes and pursuits ; of framing the plan
of our life to suit our own character ; of doing as
we like, subject to such consequences as may follow :
without impediment from our fellow creatures, so
long as what we do does not harm them, even though
they should think our conduct foolish, perverse, or
wrong. Thirdly, from this liberty of each individual,
follows the liberty, within the same limits, of combina-
tion among individuals ; freedom to unite, for any
purpose not involving harm to others : the persons
combining being supposed to be of full age, and not
forced or deceived.

No society in which these liberties are not, on the
whole, respected, is free, whatever may be its form
of government ; and never is completely free in which
they do not exist absolute and unqualified.

On Liberty

JAMES FREDERICK FERRIER

i 808- i 864

401 The True Snd of man

THE philosophy of the Cyrenaic school, founded
by Anstippus, proceeds on the assumption that
happiness is, in point of fact, the good, the supreme
good, or chief end of man ; and this assumption, so
far from being discountenanced by the philosophy of
Socrates, is involved in that philosophy as one of its
most vital principles. Viewed as a matter of fact, we
must admit that his own happiness, whatever it may

681



JAMES FREDERICK FERRIER

consist in, or whatever may be the means to be
employed in the attainment, is the end which each
individual has most at heart, and at which he ulti-
mately aims. This is the end after which all men most
eagerly strive. Happiness is the goal which, con-
sciously or unconsciously, we are all struggling to reach.
Milton has written two epic poems in which he com-
memorates our fallen and our restored condition. He
has written ' Paradise Lost ' and ' Paradise Regained.'
But the true epic of humanity — the epic which is
in a constant course of evolution from the beginning
until the end of time, the epic which is daily poured
forth from the heart of the whole human race, some-
times in rejoicing paeans, but oftener amid woeful
lamentation, tears, and disappointed hopes — what is
it but Paradise sought for ?

Lectures on Greek Philosophy

JAMES SPEDDING

1808-1881

402 'Bacon and Bribery

I KNOW nothing more inexplicable than Bacon's
unconsciousness of the state of his own case, unless
it be the case itself. That he, of all men, whose fault
had always been too much carelessness about money —
who though always too ready to borrow, to give, to lend,
and to spend, had never been either a bargainer or
a grasper or a hoarder — and whose professional experi-
ence must have continually reminded him of the peril
of meddling with any thing that could be construed
into corruption, — that he should have allowed himself
on any account to accept money from suitors while
their cases were before him, is wonderful. That he
682



JAMES SPEDDING

should have done it without feeling at the time that
he was laying himself open to a charge of what in law
would be called bribery, is more wonderful still. That
he should have done it often, and not lived under an
abiding sense of insecurity — from the consciousness
that he had secrets to conceal, of which the disclosure
would be fatal to his reputation, yet the safe keeping
did not rest solely with himself, — is most wonderful
of all. Give him credit for nothing more than ordinary
intelligence and ordinary prudence — wisdom for a
man's self — and it seems almost incredible. And yet
I believe it was the fact. The whole course of his
behaviour, from the first rumour to the final sentence,
convinces me that not the discovery of the thing only,
but the thing itself, came upon him as a surprise ; and
that if anybody had told him the day before that
he stood in danger of a charge of taking bribes, he
would have received the suggestion with unaffected
incredulity. How far I am justified in thinking so
the reader shall judge for himself ; for the impression
is derived solely from the tenor of the correspondence
which will be laid before him in due order.

The Life and Letters of Francis Bacon

EDWARD FITZGERALD

i 809- 1 883

403 The "Boat ^ce

SHORTLY after this, the rest of us agreed it was
time to be gone. We walked along the fields
past the church, crossed the boat-house ferry, and
mingled with the crowd upon the opposite bank.
Townsmen and Gownsmen, with the laced Fellow-

683



EDWARD FITZGERALD



commoner sprinkled among them here and there —
reading men and sporting men — Fellows, and even
Masters of Colleges, not indifferent to the prowess of
their respective crews — all these, conversing on all
topics, from the slang in Bell's Life to the last new
German Revelation, and moving in ever-changing
groups down the banks, where, at the farthest visible
bend of the river, was a little knot of ladies gathered
upon a green knoll, faced and illuminated by the
beams of the setting sun. Beyond which point was
heard at length some indistinct shouting, which
gradually increased, until ' They are off — they are
coming ! ' suspended other conversation among our-
selves : and suddenly the head of the first boat turned
the corner, and then another close upon it, and then
a third ; the crews pulling with all their might, but
in perfect rhythm and order ; and the crowd upon
the bank turning round to follow along with them,
cheering, ' Bravo, St. John's,' ' Go it, Trinity,' and
waving hats and caps — the high crest and blowing
forelock of Phidippus's mare, and he himself shouting
encouragement to his crew, conspicuous over all —
until, the boats reaching us, we also were caught up
in the returning tide of spectators, and hurried back
toward the boat-house ; where we arrived just in
time to see the ensign of Trinity lowered from its
pride of place, and the eagle of St. John's soaring
there instead. Then, waiting a while to hear how it
was the winner had won, and the loser had lost, and
watching Phidippus engaged in eager conversation
with his defeated brethren, I took Euphranor and
Lexilogus, one under each arm (Lycion having
strayed into better company elsewhere), and walked
home with them across the meadow that lies between
684



EDWARD FITZGERALD



the river and the town, whither the dusky troops of
gownsmen were evaporating, while twilight gathered
over all, and the nightingale began to be heard among
the flowering chestnuts of Jesus.

Euphranot

404 Sped dings Forehead

DEAR FREDERIC— I have just concluded,
with all the throes of imprudent pleasure, the
purchase of a large picture by Constable, of which,
if I can continue in the mood, I will enclose you a
sketch. It is very good : but how you and Morton
would abuse it ! Yet this, being a sketch, escapes
some of Constable's faults, and might escape some of
your censures. The trees are not splashed with that
white sky-mud, which (according to Constable's
theory) the Earth scatters up with her wheels in
travelling so briskly round the sun ; and there is
a dash and felicity in the execution that gives one a
thrill of good digestion in one's room, and the thought
of which makes one inclined to jump over the children's
heads in the streets. But if you could see my great
enormous Venetian picture you would be extonished.
Does the thought ever strike you, when looking at
pictures in a house, that you are to run and jump
at one, and go right through it into some behind-scene
world on the other side, as Harlequins do ? A steady
portrait especially invites one to do so : the quietude
of it ironically tempts one to outrage it : one feels
it would close again over the panel, like water, as if
nothing had happened. That portrait of Spedding,
for instance, which Laurence has given me : not
swords, nor cannon, nor all the bulls of Bashan butting

685



EDWARD FITZGERALD



at it, could, I feel sure, discompose that venerable
forehead. No wonder that no hair can grow at such
an altitude : no wonder his view of Bacon's virtue is
so rarefied that the common consciences of men cannot
endure it. Thackeray and I occasionally amuse our-
selves with the idea of Spedding's forehead : we find
it somehow or other in all things, just peering out of
all things : you see it in a milestone, Thackeray says.
He also draws the forehead rising with a sober light
over Mont Blanc, and reflected in the lake of Geneva.
We have great laughing over this. The forehead is
at present in Pembrokeshire I believe : or Glamorgan-
shire : or Monmouthshire : it is hard to say which.
It has gone to spend its Christmas there.

Letter to Fredertch Tennyson, 16 January 1841

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

1809-1894

40$ The Lost Sloop

THE firing of the great guns at the Navy-yard is
easily heard at the place where I was born and
lived. ' There is a ship of war come in,' they used to
say, when they heard them. Of course, I supposed
that such vessels came in unexpectedly, after indefinite
years of absence, — suddenly as falling stones ; and that
the great guns roared in their astonishment and delight
at the sight of the old war-ship splitting the bay
with her cutwater. Now the sloop-of-war the Wasf,
Captain Blakely, after gloriously capturing the Reindeer
and the Avon, had disappeared from the face of the
ocean, and was supposed to be lost. But there was
no proof of it, and, of course, for a time, hopes were
entertained that she might be heard from. Long after
686



OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES

the last real chance had utterly vanished, I pleased
myself with the fond illusion that somewhere on the
waste of waters she was still floating, and there were
years during which I never heard the sound of the
great gun booming inland from the Navy-yard without
saying to myself, ' The W asp has come ! ' and almost
thinking I could see her, as she rolled in, crumpling
the water before her, weather-beaten, barnacled, with
shattered spars and threadbare canvas, welcomed by
the shouts and tears of thousands. This was one of
those dreams that I nursed and never told. — Let me
make a clean breast of it now and say, that, so late as
to have outgrown childhood, perhaps to have got far
on toward manhood, when the roar of the cannon has
struck suddenly on my ear, I have started with a thrill
of vague expectation and tremulous delight, and the
long-unspoken words have articulated themselves in
the mind's dumb whisper, The Wasp has come I

The Autocrat oj the Breakfast-Table

ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE

1809-1891

406 Scarlett's Three Hundred
(^Balaclava)

THE difference that there was in the temperaments
of the two comrade regiments showed itself
in the last moments of the onset. The Scots Greys
gave no utterance except to a low, eager, fierce moan
of rapture — the moan of outbursting desire. The
Inniskillings went in with a cheer.

With a rolling prolongation of clangour which
resulted from the bends of a line now deformed by its

687



ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE



speed, the ' three hundred ' crashed in upon the front
of the column. They crashed in with a momentum so
strong that no cavalry, extended in line and halted,
could well have withstood the shock if it had been
physically able to turn and fall back ; but whatever might
be their inclination, the front-rank men of the Russian
column were debarred, as wesa w, from all means of break-
ing away to the rear by the weight of their own serried
squadrons sloping up the hillside close behind them ;
and it being too late for them to evade the concussion
by a lateral flight, they had no choice — it was a cruel
trial for cavalry to have to endure at the halt — they
had no choice but to await and suffer the onslaught.
On the other hand, it was certain that if the Russian
hussar being halted should so plant and keep himself
counter to his assailant as to be brought into diametric
collision with the heavier man and the heavier horse
of the Inniskillings or the Greys whilst charging direct
at his front, he must and would be overborne. It
might, therefore, be imagined that many of the troopers
in the front rank of the Russian column would now be
perforce overthrown, that numbers of our dragoons
would in their turn be brought to the ground by that
very obstacle — the obstacle of over-turned horses and
horsemen — which their onset seemed about to build
up, and that far along the front of the column the field
would be encumbered with a heap or bank of prostrated
riders and chargers, where Russians would be struggling
for extrication intermingled with Inniskillings or
Greys. Such a result would apparently have been an
evil one for the ' three hundred,' because it would
have enabled the unshattered masses of the enemy
to bring their numbers to bear against such of the red-
coats as might still remain in their saddles.
688



ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE



It was not thus, however, that the charge wrought
its effect. What had first been done by Scarlett and
the three horsemen with him, what had next been
done by the leaders of the Greys and the 2d squadron
of the Inniskilhngs, and next again by the squadron-
leaders and other regimental officers whose place was
in front of their men, that now, after more or less
struggle, the whole of these charging ' three hundred '
were enabled to achieve.

The result of their contact with the enemy was a
phenomenon so much spoken of in the days of the old
war against the French Empire, that it used to be
then described by a peculiar but recognised phrase.
Whether our people spoke with knowledge of fact, or
whether they spoke in their pride, I do not here stay
to question ; but in describing the supposed issue of
conflicts in which a mass of Continental soldiery was
assailed by English troops extended in line, it used
to be said of the foreigners that they ' accepted the
files.' This meant, it seems, that instead of opposing
his body to that of the islander with such rigid
determination as to necessitate a front-to-front clash,
and a front-to-front trial of weight and power, the
foreigner who might be steadfast enough to keep his
place in the foremost rank of the assailed mass would
still be so far yielding as to let the intruder thrust
past him and drive a way into the column.

Whatever was the foundation for this superb faith,
the phrase, as above interpreted, represents with a
singular exactness what the front rank of the Russian
column now did. Being physically barred towards
their rear by their own dense and close-pressing
squadrons, these horsemen could not fall back under
the impact of the charge ; and, on the other hand,

689



ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE



they did not so plant themselves as to be each of
them a directly opposing hindrance to an assailant.
They found and took a third course. They ' accepted
the files.' Here, there, and almost everywhere along
the assailed part of the column, the troopers who stood
in front rank so sidled and shrank that they suffered
the Grey or the Inniskillinger to tear in between them
with the licence accorded to a cannon-ball which is
seen to be coming, and must not be obstructed, but
shunned. So, although, by their charge, these few
horsemen could deliver no blow of such weight as to
shake the depths of a column extending far up the
hillside, they more or less shivered or sundered the
front rank of the mass, and then, by dint of sheer
wedge-work and fighting, they opened and cut their
way in. It was in the nature of things that at some
parts of the line the hindrance should be greater
than at others ; but, speaking in general terms, it
can be said that, as Scarlett had led, so his fiist line
righteously followed ; and that, within a brief space
from the moment of the first crash, the ' three hundred',
after more or less strife, were received into the enemy's
column.

Invasion of the Crimea

407 Damascus

BUT its gardens are the delight — the delight and
the pride of Damascus ; they are not the formal
parterres which you might expect from the Oriental
taste ; rather, they bring back to your mind the
memory of some dark old shrubbery in our northern
isle that has been charmingly un- kept up ' for many
and many a day. . .
690



ALEXANDER .WILLIAM KINGLAKE

Wild as that, the nighest woodland of a deserted
home in England, but without its sweet sadness, is
the sumptuous garden of Damascus. Forest trees,
tall and stately enough, if you could see their lofty
crests, yet lead a tussling life of it below, with their
branches struggling against strong numbers of bushes
and wilful shrubs. The shade upon the earth is black
as night. High, high above your head, and on every
side all down to the ground, the thicket is hemmed in,
and choked up by the interlacing boughs that droop
with the weight of roses, and load the slow air with their
damask breath. There are no other flowers. Here
and there, there are patches of ground made clear
from the cover, and these are either carelessly planted
with some common and useful vegetable, or else are
left free to the wayward ways of Nature, and bear
rank weeds, moist-looking, and cool to your eyes, and
freshening the sense with their earthly and bitter
fragrance. There is a lane opened through the thicket,
so broad in some places, that you can pass along side
by side — in some, so narrow (the shrubs are for ever
encroaching) that you ought, if you can, to go on the
first, and hold back the bough of the rose tree. And
through the sweet wilderness a loud rushing stream
flows tumbling along, till it is halted at last in the
lowest corner of the garden, and there tossed up in
a fountain by the side of the simple alcove. This is all.

Eothen

408 Homer and the Qhild

I, TOO, loved Homer, but not with a scholar's love.
The most humble and pious among women, was
yet so proud a mother that she could teach her first-

691



ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE

born son, no Watts's hymns — no collects for the day ;
she could teach him in earliest childhood, no less than
this — to find a home in his saddle, and love old Homer,
and all that Homer sung. True it is, that the Greek
was ingeniously rendered into English — the English
of Pope, but not even a mesh like that can screen an
earnest child from the fire of Homer's battles.

I pored over the Odyssey as over a story-book,
hoping and fearing for the hero whom yet I partly
scorned. But the Iliad — line by line, I clasped it to
my brain with reverence as well as with love. As an
old woman deeply trustful sits reading her Bible
because of the world to come, so, as though it would
fit me for the coming strife of this temporal world,
I read, and read the Iliad. Even outwardly it was not
like other books ; it was throned in towering folios.
There was a preface or dissertation printed in type still
more majestic than the rest of the book ; this I read,
but not till my enthusiasm for the Iliad had already
run high. The writer compiling the opinions of
many men, and chiefly of the ancients, set forth,
I know not how quaintly, that the Iliad was all in
all to the human race — that it was history — poetry
— revelation — that the works of men's hands were
folly and vanity, and would pass away like the dreams
of a child, but that the kingdom of Homer would
endure for ever and ever.

I assented with all my soul. I read, and still read ;
I came to know Homer. A learned commentator
knows something of the Greeks, in the same sense as
an oil and colour man may be said to know something
of painting ; but take an untamed child, and leave
him alone for twelve months with any translation of
Homer, and he will be nearer by twenty centuries to
692



ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE



the spirit of old Greece : he does not stop in the ninth
year of the siege to admire this or that group of
words — he has no books in his tent, but he shares
in vital counsels with the ' King of men,' and knows
the inmost souls of the impending gods ; how pro-
fanely he exults over the powers divine when they
are taught to dread the prowess of mortals ! and
most of all how he rejoices when the God of War
flies howling from the spear of Diomed, and mounts
into heaven for safety ! Then the beautiful episode
of the 6th book : the way to feel this is not to go
casting about, and learning from pastors and masters
how best to admire it : the impatient child is not
grubbing for beauties, but pushing the siege ; the
women vex him with their delays and their talking —
the mention of the nurse is personal, and little
sympathy has he for the child that is young enough
to be frightened at the nodding plume of a helmet ;
but all the while that he thus chafes at the pausing
of the action, the strong vertical light of Homer's
poetry is blazing so full upon the people and things
of the Iliad, that soon to the eyes of the child they
grow familiar as his mother's shawl ; yet of this great
gain he is unconscious, and on he goes, vengefully
thirsting for the best blood of Troy, and never
remitting his fierceness, till almost suddenly it is
changed for sorrow — the new and generous sorrow
that he learns to feel, when the noblest of all his foes
lies sadly dying at the Scaean gate.

Eolhen



693



ABRAHAM LINCOLN

1809-1865

409 Gettysburg

FOURSCORE and seven years ago our fathers
brought forth upon this continent a new nation,
conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition
that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged
in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or
any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long
endure. We are met on a great battle-field of that war.
We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as
a final resting-place of those who here gave their
lives that that nation might live. It is altogether
fitting and proper that we should do this. But in
a larger sense we cannot dedicate, we cannot conse-
crate, we cannot hallow this ground. The brave
men, living and dead, who struggled here, have
consecrated it far above our power to add or detract.
The world will little note, nor long remember, what
we say here, but it can never forget what they did here.
It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to
the unfinished work they have thus far so nobly
advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated
to the great task remaining before us, that from
these honored dead we take increased devotion to that
cause for which they here gave the last full measure
of devotion ; that we here highly resolve that the dead
shall not have died in vain, that the nation shall,
under God, have a new birth of freedom, and that
the government of the people, by the people, and for
the people, shall not perish from the earth.

Dedicatory Address at Gettysburg Cemetery, Jp Nov. 1863



694



JOHN BROWN

1810-1882

410 zA Dog Fight

FOUR-AND-THIRTY years ago, Bob Ainslie and
I were coming up Infirmary Street from the High
School, our heads together, and our arms intertwisted,
as only lovers and boys know how, or why.

When we got to the top of the street, and turned
north, we espied a crowd at the Tron Church. ' A dog-
fight ! ' shouted Bob, and was off ; and so was I, both
of us all but praying that it might not be over before
we got up ! And is not this boy-nature ? and human
nature too ? and don't we all wish a house on fire not
to be out before we see it? . .

Does any curious and finely-ignorant woman wish to
know how Bob's eye at a glance announced a dog-fight
to his brain? He did not, he could not see the dogs
fighting ; it was a flash of an inference, a rapid in-
duction. The crowd round a couple of dogs fighting, is
a crowd masculine mainly, with an occasional active,
compassionate woman, fluttering wildly round the out-
side, and using her tongue and her hands freely upon
the men, as so many ' brutes ' ; it is a crowd annular,
compact, and mobile ; a crowd centripetal, having its
eyes and its heads all bent downwards and inwards, to
one common focus.

Well, Bob and I are up, and find it is not over :
a small thoroughbred, white bull-terrier, is busy
throttling a large shepherd's dog, unaccustomed to war,
but not to be trifled with. They are hard at it ; the
scientific little fellow doing his work in great style, his
pastoral enemy fighting wildly, but with the sharpest
of teeth and a great courage. Science and breeding,
however, soon had their own ; the Game Chicken, as

695



JOHN BROWN

the premature Bob called him, working his way up,
took his final grip of poor Yarrow's throat, — and he
lay gasping and done for. His master, a brown, hand-
some, big young shepherd from Tweedsmuir, would
have liked to have knocked down any man, would
' drink up Esil, or eat a crocodile,' for that part, if he
had a chance : it was no use kicking the little dog ;
that would only make him hold the closer. Many were
the means shouted out in mouthfuls, of the best possible
ways of ending it. ' Water ! ' but there was none near,
and many cried for it who might have got it from the
well at Blackfriar's Wynd. ' Bite the tail ! ' and a
large, vague, benevolent, middle-aged man, more
desirous than wise, with some struggle got the bushy
end of Yarrow's tail into his ample mouth, and bit
it with all his might. This was more than enough for
the much-enduring, much-perspiring shepherd, who,
with a gleam of joy over his broad visage, delivered
a terrific facer upon our large, vague, benevolent,
middle-aged friend, — who went down like a shot.

Still the Chicken holds : death not far off. ' Snuff !
a pinch of snuff ! ' observed a calm, highly-dressed
young buck, with an eye-glass in his eye. ' Snuff,
indeed ! ' growled the angry crowd, affronted and
glaring. ' Snuff ! a pinch of snuff ! ' again observes
the buck, but with more urgency ; whereon were
produced several open boxes, and from a mull which
may have been at Culloden, he took a pinch, knelt
down, and presented it to the nose of the Chicken.
The laws of physiology and of snuff take their course ;
the Chicken sneezes, and Yarrow is free !

The young pastoral giant stalks off with Yarrow in
his arms, — comforting him.

But the Bull Terrier's blood is up, and his soul
696



JOHN BROWN

unsatisfied ; he grips the first dog he meets, and
discovering she is not a dog, in Homeric phrase, he
makes a brief sort of amende, and is off. The boys,
with Bob and me at their head, are after him : down.
Niddry Street he goes, bent on mischief ; up the
Cowgate like an arrow — Bob and I, and our small men,
panting behind.

Rab and his Friends

411 'Presence of £Mind

DR. CHALMERS used to say that in the dynamics
of human affairs, two qualities were essential to
greatness — Power and Promptitude. One man might
have both, another power without promptitude,
another promptitude without power. We must all
feel the common sense of this, and can readily see how
it applies to a general in the field, to a pilot in a storm,
to a sportsman, to a fencer, to a debater. It is the
same with an operating surgeon at all times, and may
be at any time with the practitioner of the art of
healing. He must be ready for what are called emer-
gencies — cases which rise up at your feet, and must be
dealt with on the instant, — he must have power and
promptitude.

It is a curious condition of mind that this requires :
it is like sleeping with your pistol under your pillow,
and it on full cock ; a moment lost and all may be
lost. There is the very nick of time. This is what we
mean by presence of mind ; by a man having such
a subject at his finger-ends ; that part of the mind
lying nearest the outer world, and having to act on it
through the bodily organs, through the will — the out-
posts must be always awake. It is of course, so to

697



JOHN BROWN

speak, only a portion of the mind that is thus needed
and thus available ; if the whole mind were for ever at
the advanced post, it would soon lose itself in this
endeavour to keep it. . . We must have just enough of
the right knowledge and no more; we must have the
habit of using this ; we must have self-reliance, and the
consentaneousness of the entire mind ; and whatsoever
our hand finds to do, we must do it with our might.
Therefore it is that this master act of the man, under
some sudden and great unexpected crisis, is in a great
measure performed unconsciously as to its mental
means. The man is so totus in illo, that there is no bit
of the mind left to watch and record the acts of the
rest ; therefore men, when they have done some
signal feat of presence of mind, if asked how they did
it, generally don't very well know — they just did it :
it was, in fact, done and then thought of, not thought
of and then done, in which case it would likely never
have been done. Not that the act was uncaused by
mind ; it is one of the highest powers of mind thus to
act ; but it is done, if I may use the phrase, by an
acquired instinct. You will find all this in that won-
derful old Greek who was Alexander the Great's and the
old world's schoolmaster, and ours if we were wise, —
whose truthfulness and clear insight one wonders at
the longer he lives. He seems to have seen the human
mind as a bird or an engineer does the earth — he knew
the plan of it. We now-a-days see it as one sees a
country, athwart and in perspective, and from the
side ; he saw it from above and from below. There are
therefore no shadows, no foreshortenings, no clear-
obscure, indeed no disturbing medium ; it is as if he
examined everything in vacuo. I refer my readers
to what he says on 'Ay-^lvoia and Ev<TTo\ta.

Horae Subsecivae



698



ELIZABETH GASKELL

1810-1865

412 ^Miss £Matty goes Visiting

A FEW days after, a note came from Mr. Holbrook,
. asking us — impartially asking both of us — in a
formal, old-fashioned style, to spend a day at his house
— a long June day — for it was June now. He named
that he had also invited his cousin, Miss Pole ; so that
we might join in a fly, which could be put up at his
house.

I expected Miss Matty to jump at this invitation ;
but, no ! Miss Pole and I had the greatest difficulty
in persuading her to go. She thought it was improper ;
and was even half annoyed when we utterly ignored
the idea of any impropriety in her going with two
other ladies to see her old lover. Then came a more
serious difficulty. She did not think Deborah would
have liked her to go. This took us half a day's good
hard talking to get over ; but, at the first sentence of
relenting, I seized the opportunity, and wrote and
dispatched an acceptance in her name — fixing day
and hour, that all might be decided and done with. . .

She was in a state of silent agitation all the way to
Woodley. She had evidently never been there before ;
and, although she little dreamt I knew anything of
her early story, I could perceive she was in a tremor
at the thought of seeing the place which might have
been her home, and round which it is probable that
many of her innocent girlish imaginations had clustered.
It was a long drive there, through paved jolting lanes.
Miss Matilda sat bolt upright, and looked wistfully
out of the windows, as we drew near the end of our
journey. The aspect of the country was quiet and
pastoral. Woodley stood among fields ; and there was

699



ELIZABETH GASKELL



an old-fashioned garden, where roses and currant-bushes
touched each other, and where the feathery asparagus
formed a pretty background to the pinks and gilly-
flowers ; there was no drive up to the door : we got out
at a little gate, and walked up a straight box-edged path.

' My cousin might make a drive, I think,' said
Miss Pole, who was afraid of earache, and had only
her cap on.

' I think it is very pretty,' said Miss Matty, with
a soft plaintiveness in her voice, and almost in a
whisper ; for just then Mr. Holbrook appeared at the
door, rubbing his hands in very effervescence of hospi-
tality. He looked more like my idea of Don Quixote
than ever, and yet the likeness was only external.
His respectable housekeeper stood modestly at the
door to bid us welcome ; and while she led the elder
ladies upstairs to a bedroom, I begged to look about
the garden. My request evidently pleased the old
gentleman ; who took me all round the place, and
showed me his six-and-twenty cows, named after the
different letters of the alphabet. . .

When he and I went in, we found that dinner was
nearly ready in the kitchen, — for so I suppose the
room ought to be called, as there were oak dressers
and cupboards all round, an oven by the side of the
fireplace, and only a small Turkey carpet in the middle
of the flag-floor. . .

When the ducks and green peas came, we looked at
each other in dismay ; we had only two-pronged,
black-handled forks. It is true, the steel was as
bright as silver ; but what were we to do ? Miss
Matty picked up her peas, one by one, on the point

25 an oven) Text gives 'all over', an obvtous misprint repeated in
all editions
700



ELIZABETH GASKELL



of the prongs, much as Amine ate her grains of rice
after her previous feast with the Ghoul. Miss Pole
sighed over her delicate young peas as she left them
on one side of her plate untasted ; for they would drop
between the prongs. I looked at my host : the peas
were going wholesale into his capacious mouth,
shovelled up by his large round-ended knife. I saw,
I imitated, I survived ! My friends, in spite of my
precedent, could not muster up courage enough to do
an ungenteel thing ; and, if Mr. Holbrook had not
been so heartily hungry, he would probably have seen
that the good peas went away almost untouched.

After dinner, a clay pipe was brought in, and a
spittoon ; and, asking us to retire to another room,
where he would soon join us, if we disliked tobacco-
smoke, he presented his pipe to Miss Matty, and
requested her to fill the bowl. This was a compliment
to a lady in his youth ; but it was rather inappropriate
to propose it as an honour to Miss Matty, who had
been trained by her sister to hold smoking of every
kind in utter abhorrence. But if it was a shock to
her refinement, it was also a gratification to her feelings
to be thus selected ; so she daintily stuffed the strong
tobacco into the pipe ; and then we withdrew.

' It is very pleasant dining with a bachelor,' said
Miss Matty, softly, as we settled ourselves in the
counting-house. ' I only hope it is not improper ;
so many pleasant things are ! '

Cranford

413 Thill is in Love

THEN we talked about the different broods of
chickens, and she showed me the hens that were
good mothers, and told me the characters of all the

701



ELIZABETH GASKELL



poultry with the utmost good faith ; and in all good
faith I listened, for I believe there was a great deal of
truth in all she said. And then we strolled on into
the wood beyond the ash-meadow, and both of us
sought for early primroses, amid the fresh green crinkled
leaves. She was not afraid of being alone with me after
the first day. I never saw her so lovely, or so happy.
I think she hardly knew why she was so happy all the
time. I can see her now, standing under the budding
branches of the grey trees, over which a tinge of green
seemed to be deepening day after day, her sun-bonnet
fallen back on her neck, her hands full of delicate wood-
flowers, quite unconscious of my gaze, but intent on
sweet mockery of some bird in neighbouring bush or
tree. She had the art of warbling, and replying to the
notes of different birds, and knew their song, their
habits and ways, more accurately than any one else
I ever knew. She had often done it at my request the
spring before ; but this year she really gurgled, and
whistled, and warbled just as they did, out of the very
fullness and joy of her heart. She was more than ever
the very apple of her father's eye ; her mother gave her
both her own share of love and that of the dead child
who had died in infancy. I have heard cousin Holman
murmur, after a long dreamy look at Phillis, and tell
herself how like she was growing to Johnnie, and soothe
herself with plaintive inarticulate sounds, and many
gentle shakes of the head, for the aching sense of loss
she would never get over in this world. The old
servants about the place had the dumb loyal attach-
ment to the child of the land, common to most
agricultural labourers ; not often stirred into activity
or expression. My cousin Phillis was like a rose that
5 amid) texts repeat the misprint ' and'
702



ELIZABETH GASKELL



had come to full bloom on the sunny side of a lonely-
house, sheltered from storms. I have read in some
book of poetry —

A maid whom there were none to praise,
And very few to love.

And somehow those lines always reminded me of
Phillis ; yet they were not true of her either. I never
heard her praised ; and out of her own household
there were very few to love her ; but though no one
spoke out their approbation, she always did right in
her parents' eyes, out of her natural simple goodness
and wisdom. Holdsworth's name was never mentioned
between us when we were alone ; but I had sent on
his letters to the minister, as I have said ; and more
than once he began to talk about our absent friend,
when he was smoking his pipe after the day's work
was done. Then Phillis hung her head a little over
her work, and listened in silence.

Cousin PhtUis

JOHN BRIGHT

1811-1889

414 The tAngel of Death

I APPEAL to the noble lord at the head of the Govern-
ment and to this House; I am not now complaining
of the war — I am not now complaining of the terms of
peace, nor, indeed, of anything that has been done —
but I wish to suggest to this House what, I believe,
thousands, and tens of thousands, of the most educated
and of the most Christian portion of the people of this
country are feeling upon this subject, although, indeed,
in the midst of a certain clamour in the country, they
do not give public expression to their feelings. Your

7°3



JOHN BRIGHT

country is not in an advantageous state at this moment ;
from one end of the kingdom to the other there is
a general collapse of industry. Those members of this
House not intimately acquainted with the trade and
commerce of the country do not fully comprehend
our position as to the diminution of employment and
the lessening of wages. An increase in the cost of
living is finding its way to the homes and hearts of
a vast number of the labouring population. At the
same time there is growing up — and, notwithstanding
what some hon. members of this House may think
of me, no man regrets it more than I do — a bitter and
angry feeling against that class which has for a long
period conducted the public affairs of this country.
I like political changes when such changes are made
as the result, not of passion, but of deliberation and
reason. Changes so made are safe, but changes made
under the influence of violent exaggeration, or of the
violent passions of public meetings, are not changes
usually approved by this House or advantageous to
the country. I cannot but notice, in speaking to
gentlemen who sit on either side of this House, or in
speaking to any one I meet between this House and
any of those localities we frequent when this House
is up — I cannot, I say, but notice that an uneasy
feeling exists as to the news that may arrive by the
very next mail from the East. I do not suppose
that your troops are to be beaten in actual conflict
with the foe, or that they will be driven into the sea ;
but I am certain that many homes in England in which
there now exists a fond hope that the distant one may
return — many such homes may be rendered desolate
when the next mail shall arrive. The angel of death
has been abroad throughout the land ; you may almost
704



JOHN BRIGHT



hear the beating of his wings. There is no one, as
when the first-born were slain of old, to sprinkle with
blood the lintel and the two sideposts of our doors,
that he may spare and pass on ; he takes his victims
from the castle of the noble, the mansion of the
wealthy, and the cottage of the poor and the lowly,
and it is on behalf of all these classes that I make
this solemn appeal.

Speech in the House of Commons on the Crimean War

23 Feb. 1855

WILLIAM MAKEPEACE
THACKERAY

1811-1863

415 Sir T'itt Qrawley in Town

JOHN, the groom, who had driven the carriage
alone, did not care to descend to ring the bell ;
and so prayed a passing milk-bov to perform that
office for him. When the bell was rung, a head ap-
peared between the interstices of the dining-room
shutters, and the door was opened by a man in drab
breeches and gaiters, with a dirty old coat, a foul
old neckcloth lashed round his bristly neck, a shining
bald head, a leering red face, a pair of twinkling grey
eyes, and a mouth perpetually on the grin.

' This Sir Pitt Crawley's ? ' says John, from the box.
' Ees,' says the man at the door with a nod.
' Hand down these 'ere trunks then,' said John.
' Hand 'n down yourself,' said the porter.
' Don't you see I can't leave my hosses ? Come,
bear a hand, my fine feller, and miss will give you
some beer,' said John, with a horse-laugh, for he was
no longer respectful to Miss Sharp, as her connexion

2830 A a 705



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



with the family was broken off, and as she had given
nothing to the servants on coming away.

The bald-headed man, taking his hands out of his
breeches-pockets, advanced on this summons, and
throwing Miss Sharp's trunk over his shoulder, carried
it into the house.

' Take this basket and shawl, if you please, and open
the door,' said Miss Sharp, and descended from the
carriage in much indignation. ' I shall write to
Mr. Sedley, and inform him of your conduct,' said she
to the groom.

' Don't,' replied that functionary. ' I hope you've
forgot nothink ? Miss 'Melia's gownds — have you got
them — as the lady's maid was to have 'ad? I hope
they'll fit you. Shut the door, Jim, you'll get no good
out of '<?r,' continued John, pointing with his thumb
towards Miss Sharp : ' a bad lot, I tell you, a bad lot,'
and so saying, Mr. Sedley's groom drove away. The
truth is, he was attached to the lady's maid in question,
and indignant that she should have been robbed of
her perquisites.

On entering the dining-room, by the orders of the
individual in gaiters, Rebecca found that apartment
not more cheerful than such rooms usually are, when
genteel families are out of town. The faithful
chambers seem, as it were, to mourn the absence of
their masters. The Turkey carpet has rolled itself
up, and retired sulkily under the sideboard : the
pictures have hidden their faces behind old sheets of
brown paper : the ceiling-lamp is muffled up in a
dismal sack of brown holland : the window-curtains
have disappeared under all sorts of shabby envelopes :
the marble bust of Sir Walpole Crawley is looking
from its black corner at the bare boards and the oiled
706



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



fire-irons, and the empty card-racks over the mantel-
piece : the cellaret has lurked away behind the carpet :
the chairs are turned up heads and tails along the walls ;
and in the dark corner opposite the statue, is an old-
fashioned crabbed knife-box, locked and sitting on
a dumb-waiter.

Two kitchen-chairs, and a round table, and an
attentuated old poker and tongs were, however,
gathered round the fireplace, as was a saucepan over
a feeble sputtering fire. There was a bit of cheese
and bread, and a tin candlestick on the table, and
a little black porter in a pint-pot.

' Had your dinner, I suppose f It is not too warm
for you ? Like a drop of beer ? '

' Where is Sir Pitt Crawley ? ' said Miss Sharp,
majestically.

4 He, he ! 7'm Sir Pitt Crawley. Reklect you owe
me a pint for bringing down your luggage. He, he !
Ask Tinker if I aynt. Mrs. Tinker, Miss Sharp !
Miss Governess, Mrs. Charwoman. Ho, ho ! '

The lady addressed as Mrs. Tinker at this moment
made her appearance with a pipe and a paper of tobacco
for which she had been dispatched a minute before
Miss Sharp's arrival ; and she handed the articles over
to Sir Pitt, who had taken his seat by the fire.

' Where 's the farden ? ' said he. ' I gave you three
half -pence. Where 's the change, old Tinker ? '

' There ! ' replied Mrs. Tinker, flinging down the
coin ; ' it 's only baronets as cares about farthings.'

' A farthing a day is seven shillings a year,' answered
the M.P. ; ' seven shillings a year is the interest of
seven guineas. Take care of your farthings.'

Vanity Fair

707



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



416 Waterloo

ALL our friends took their share and fought like
JLx. men in the great field. All day long, whilst
women were praying ten miles away, the lines of the
dauntless English infantry were receiving and repelling
the furious charges of the French horsemen. Guns
which were heard at Brussels were ploughing up their
ranks, and comrades falling, and the resolute survivors
closing in. Towards evening, the attack of the French,
repeated and resisted so bravely, slackened in its fury.
They had other foes besides the British to engage, or
were preparing for a final onset. It came at last :
the columns of the Imperial Guard marched up the
hill of St. Jean, at length and at once to sweep the
English from the height which they had maintained
all day, and spite of all : unscared by the thunder of
the artillery, which hurled death from the English
line — the dark rolling column pressed on and up the
hill. It seemed almost to crest the eminence, when it
began to wave and falter. Then it stopped, still facing
the shot. Then at last the English troops rushed from
the post from which no enemy had been able to
dislodge them, and the Guard turned and fled.

No more firing was heard at Brussels — the pursuit
rolled miles away. Darkness came down on the field
and city : and Amelia was praying for George, who
was lying on his face, dead, with a bullet through
his heart.

Vamly Fair



708



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



417 Mother and Daughter

i. O matre pulchra

SHE gave him her hand, her little fair hand : there
was only her marriage ring on it. The quarrel
was all over. The year of grief and estrangement was
passed. They never had been separated. His mistress
had never been out of his mind all that time. No, not
once. No, not in the prison ; nor in the camp ; nor
on shore before the enemy ; nor at sea under the stars
of solemn midnight, nor as he watched the glorious
rising of the dawn : not even at the table, where
he sat carousing with friends, or at the theatre yonder,
where he tried to fancy that other eyes were brighter
than hers. Brighter eyes there might be, and faces
more beautiful, but none so dear — no voice so sweet
as that of his beloved mistress, who had been sister,
mother, goddess to him during his youth — goddess
now no more, for he knew of her weaknesses ; and by
thought, by suffering, and that experience it brings,
was older now than she ; but more fondly cherished
as woman perhaps than ever she had been adored as
divinity. What is it? Where lies it? the secret
which makes one little hand the dearest of all ? Who-
ever can unriddle that mystery? Here she was, her
son by his side, his dear boy. Here she was, weeping
and happy. She took his hand in both hers ; he felt
her tears. . .

They walked as though they had never been parted,
slowly, with the grey twilight closing round them.

' And now we are drawing near to home,' she
continued, ' I knew you would come, Harry, if — if
it was but to forgive me for having spoken unjustly
to you after that horrid — horrid misfortune. I was

709



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



half frantic with grief then when I saw you. And
I know now — they have told me. That wretch, whose
name I can never mention, even has said it : how you
tried to avert the quarrel, and would have taken it
on yourself, my poor child : but it was God's will
that I should be punished, and that my dear lord
should fall.'

4 He gave me his blessing on his death-bed,' Esmond
said. 4 Thank God for that legacy ! '

4 Amen, amen ! dear Henry,' says the lady, pressing
his arm. 4 1 knew it. Mr. Atterbury, of St. Bride's,
who was called to him, told me so. And I thanked
God, too, and in my prayers ever since remembered it.'

4 You had spared me many a bitter night, had you
told me sooner,' Mr. Esmond said.

4 1 know it, I know it,' she answered, in a tone of
such sweet humility, as made Esmond repent that he
should ever have dared to reproach her. ' I know how
wicked my heart has been ; and I have suffered too,
my dear. I confessed to Mr. Atterbury — I must not
tell any more. He — I said I would not write to you
or go to you — and it was better even that, having
parted, we should part. But I knew you would come
back — I own that. That is no one's fault. And to-day,
Henry, in the anthem, when they sang it, 4 When the
Lord turned the captivity of Zion, we were like them
that dream,' I thought, yes, like them that dream —
them that dream. And then it went, 4 They that sow
in tears shall reap in joy ; and he that goeth forth
and weepeth, shall doubtless come home again with re-
joicing, bringing his sheaves with him ' ; I looked
up from the book, and saw you. I was not surprised
when I saw you. I knew you would come, my dear,
and saw the gold sunshine round your head.'
710



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY

She smiled an almost wild smile as she looked up
at him. The moon was up by this time, glittering
keen in the frosty sky. He could see, for the first
time now clearly, her sweet careworn face.

' Do you know what day it is f ' she continued.
' It is the 29th of December — it is your birthday !
But last year we did not drink it — no, no. My Lord
was cold, and my Harry was likely to die : and my brain
was in a fever ; and we had no wine. But now —
now you are come again, bringing your sheaves with
you — your sheaves with you !

it. filia pulchrior

As they came up to the house at Walcote, the
windows from within were lighted up with friendly
welcome ; the supper-table was spread in the oak-
parlour ; it seemed as if forgiveness and love were
awaiting the returning prodigal. Two or three
familiar faces of domestics were on the look-out at
the porch — the old housekeeper was there, and young
Lockwood from Castlewood in my Lord's livery of
tawny and blue. His dear mistress pressed his arm
as they passed into the hall. Her eyes beamed out
on him with affection indescribable. ' Welcome,' was
all she said, as she looked up, putting back her fair
curls and black hood. A sweet rosy smile blushed on
her face : Harry thought he had never seen her look
so charming. Her face was lighted with a joy that was
brighter than beauty — she took a hand of her son
who was in the hall waiting his mother — she did not
quit Esmond's arm.

' Welcome, Harry ! ' my young Lord echoed after
her. ' Here we are all come to say so. Here's old
Pincot, hasn't she grown handsome ? ' and Pincot,

711



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



who was older, and no handsomer than usual, made
a curtsy to the captain, as she called Esmond, and told
my Lord to ' Have done, now.'

' And here's Jack Lockwood. He'll make a famous
grenadier, Jack ; and so shall I ; we'll both 'list under
you, Cousin. As soon as I am seventeen, I go to the
army — every gentleman goes to the army. Look !
who comes here — ho, ho ! ' he burst into a laugh.
' 'Tis Mistress Trix, with a new ribbon ; I knew she
would put one on as soon as she heard a captain was
coming to supper.'

This laughing colloquy took place in the hall of
Walcote House : in the midst of which is a staircase
that leads from an open gallery, where are the doors
of the sleeping-chambers : and from one of these,
a wax candle in her hand, and illuminating her, came
Mistress Beatrix — the light falling indeed upon the
scarlet ribbon which she wore, and upon the most
brilliant white neck in the world.

Esmond had left a child and found a woman, grown
beyond the common height ; and arrived at such
a dazzling completeness of beauty, that his eyes might
well show surprise and delight at beholding her. In
hers there was a brightness so lustrous and melting,
that I have seen a whole assembly follow her as if by
an attraction irresistible : and that night the great
Duke was at the playhouse after Ramillies, every soul
turned and looked (she chanced to enter at the
opposite side of the theatre at the same moment) at
her, and not at him. She was a brown beauty : that
is, her eyes, hair, and eyebrows and eyelashes, were
dark : her hair curling with rich undulations, and
waving over her shoulders ; but her complexion was
as dazzling white as snow in sunshine ; except her
712



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



cheeks, which were a bright red, and her lips, which
were of a still deeper crimson. Her mouth and chin,
they said, were too large and full, and so they might
be for a goddess in marble, but not for a woman whose
eyes were fire, whose look was love, whose voice was
the sweetest low song, whose shape was perfect
symmetry, health, decision, activity, whose foot as
it planted itself on the ground, was firm but flexible,
and whose motion, whether rapid or slow, was always
perfect grace — agile as a nymph, lofty as a queen —
now melting, now imperious, now sarcastic, there was
no single movement of hers but was beautiful. As
he thinks of her, he who writes feels young again, and
remembers a paragon.

So she came holding her dress with one fair rounded
arm, and her taper before her, tripping down the stair
to greet Esmond.

' She hath put on her scarlet stockings and white
shoes,' says my Lord, still laughing. ' Oh my fine
mistress ! is this the way you set your cap at the cap-
tain ! ' She approached, shining smiles upon Esmond,
who could look at nothing but her eyes. She advanced
holding forward her head, as if she would have him
kiss her as he used to do when she was a child.

' Stop,' she said, ' I am grown too big ! Welcome,
Cousin Harry,' and she made him an arch curtsey,
sweeping down to the ground almost, with the most
gracious bend, looking up the while with the brightest
eyes and sweetest smile. Love seemed to radiate from
her. Harry eyed her with such a rapture as the first
lover is described as having by Milton.

' West-ce pas ? ' says my Lady, in a low, sweet voice,
still hanging on his arm.

The Hi s lory of Henry Esmond



713



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



418 Tu/vis et Umbra

AS Esmond and the dean walked away from Kensing-
ton discoursing of this tragedy, and how fatal
it was to the cause which they both had at heart ; the
street-criers were already out with their broadsides,
shouting through the town the full, true, and horrible
account of the death of Lord Mohun and Duke
Hamilton in a duel. A fellow had got to Kensington,
and was crying it in the square there at very early
morning, when Mr. Esmond happened to pass by.
He drove the man from under Beatrix's very window,
whereof the casement had been set open. The sun
was shining though 'twas November : he had seen the
market-carts rolling into London, the guard relieved
at the Palace, the labourers trudging to their work
in the gardens between Kensington and the City — the
wandering merchants and hawkers filling the air with
their cries. The world was going to its business again,
although dukes lay dead and ladies mourned for them ;
and kings, very likely, lost their chances. So night and
day pass away, and to-morrow comes, and our place
knows us not. Esmond thought of the courier, now
galloping on the north road to inform him, who was
Earl of Arran yesterday, that he was Duke of Hamilton
to-day, and of a thousand great schemes, hopes,
ambitions, that were alive in the gallant heart, beating
a few hours since, and now in a little dust quiescent.

The History of Henry Esmond

419 ' The Steps of a Qood <£Man '

THE custom of the school is, that on the 12th of
December, the Founder's Day, the head gown-
boy shall recite a Latin oration, in praise Fundatons
7M



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



Nostri, and upon other subjects ; and a goodly com-
pany of old Cistercians is generally brought together
to attend this oration : after which we go to chapel
and hear a sermon ; after which we adjourn to a great
dinner, where old condisciples meet, old toasts are
given, and speeches are made. Before marching from
the oration-hall to chapel, the stewards of the day's
dinner, according to old-fashioned rite, have wands
put into their hands, walk to church at the head of
the procession, and sit there in places of honour.
The boys are already in their seats, with smug fresh
faces, and shining white collars ; the old black-gowned
pensioners are on their benches ; the chapel is lighted,
and Founder's Tomb, with its grotesque carvings,
monsters, heraldries, darkles and shines with the most
wonderful shadows and lights. There he lies, Fun-
dator Noster, in his ruff and gown, awaiting the great
Examination Day. We oldsters, be we ever so old,
become boys again as we look at that familiar old
tomb, and think how the seats are altered since we
were here, and how the doctor — not the present doctor,
the doctor of our time — used to sit yonder, and his
awful eye used to frighten us shuddering boys, on whom
it lighted ; and how the boy next us would kick our
shins during service time, and how the monitor would
cane us afterwards because our shins were kicked.
Yonder sit forty cherry-cheeked boys, thinking about
home and holidays to-morrow. Yonder sit some
threescore old gentlemen pensioners of the hospital,
listening to the prayers and the psalms. You hear
them coughing feebly in the twilight — the old reverend
blackgowns. Is Codd Ajax alive, you wonder ? — the
Cistercian lads called these old gentlemen Codds,
I know not wherefore — I know not wherefore — but



715



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



is old Codd Ajax alive, I wonder? or Codd Soldier?
or kind old Codd Gentleman, or has the grave closed
over them ? A plenty of candles lights up this chapel,
and this scene of age and youth, and early memories,
and pompous death. How solemn the well-remembered
prayers are, here uttered again in the place where in
childhood we used to hear them ! How beautiful
and decorous the rite ; how noble the ancient words
of the supplications which the priest utters, and to
which generations of fresh children, and troops of by-
gone seniors have cried Amen under those arches !
The service for Founder's Day is a special one ; one
of the psalms selected being the thirty-seventh, and
we hear

23. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he
dehghteth in his way.

24. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the
Lord upholdeth him with His hand.

25 I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen
the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

As we came to this verse, I chanced to look up from
my book towards the swarm of black-coated pensioners :
and amongst them — amongst them — sat Thomas
Newcome.

His dear old head was bent down over his Prayer-
book ; there was no mistaking him. He wore the black
gown of the pensioners of the Hospital of Grey Friars.
His Order of the Bath was on his breast. He stood
there amongst the poor brethren, uttering the re-
sponses to the psalm. The steps of this good man had
been ordered hither by Heaven's decree : to this
Alms-house ! Here it was ordained that a life all love,
and kindness and honour, should end ! I heard no
more of prayers, and psalms, and sermon, after that.

The Newcomes

716



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



420 C^ ur * n the Qrisons

I HAVE seldom seen a place more quaint, pretty,
calm, and pastoral, than this remote little Chur.
What need have the inhabitants for walls and ramparts,
except to build summer-houses, to trail vines, and
hang clothes to dry? No enemies approach the great
mouldering gates : only at morn and even, the cows
come lowing past them, the village maidens chatter
merrily round the fountains, and babble like the ever-
voluble stream that flows under the old walls. The
schoolboys, with book and satchel, in smart uniforms,
march up to the gymnasium, and return thence at
their stated time. There is one coffee-house in the
town, and I see one old gentleman goes to it. There
are shops with no customers seemingly, and the lazy
tradesmen look out of their little windows at the single
stranger sauntering by. There is a stall with baskets
of queer little black grapes and apples, and a pretty
brisk trade with half a dozen urchins standing round.
But, beyond this, there is scarce any talk or movement
in the street. There 's nobody at the book-shop.
' If you will have the goodness to come again in an
hour,' says the banker, with his mouth full of dinner
at one o'clock, ' you can have the money.' There is
nobody at the hotel, save the good landlady, the kind
waiters, the brisk young cook who ministers to you.
Nobody is in the Protestant church — (oh ! strange
sight, the two confessions are here at peace !) — nobody
in the Catholic church : until the sacristan, from his
snug abode in the cathedral close, espies the traveller
eyeing the monsters and pillars before the old shark-
toothed arch of his cathedral, and comes out (with
a view to remuneration possibly) and opens the gate,

717



WILLIAM MAKEPEACE THACKERAY



and shows you the venerable church, and the queer
old relics in the sacristy, and the ancient vestments
(a black velvet cope, amongst other robes, as fresh as
yesterday, and presented by that notorious ' pervert,'
Henry of Navarre and France), and the statue of
Saint Lucius, who built St. Peter's Church, opposite
No. 65, Cornhill.

Roundaboul Papers

CHARLES DICKENS

1812-1870

421 David's Library

MY father had left a small collection of books in
a little room up-stairs, to which I had access
(for it adjoined my own) and which nobody else in
our house ever troubled. From that blessed little
room, Roderick Random, Peregrine Pickle, Humphrey
Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wakefield, Don
Quixote, Gil Bias, and Robinson Crusoe, came out,
a glorious host, to keep me company. They kept alive
my fancy, and my hope of something beyond that
place and time, — they, and the Arabian Nights, and
the Tales of the Genii, — and did me no harm ; for
whatever harm was in some of them was not there for
me ; I knew nothing of it. It is astonishing to me
now, how I found time, in the midst of my porings
and blunderings over heavier themes, to read those
books as I did. It is curious to me how I could ever
have consoled myself under my small troubles (which
were great troubles to me), by impersonating my
favourite characters in them — as I did — and by putting
Mr. and Miss Murdstone into all the bad ones — which
718



CHARLES DICKENS

I did too. I have been Tom Jones (a child's Tom
Jones, a harmless creature) for a week together. I have
sustained my own idea of Roderick Random for a
month at a stretch, I verily believe. I had a greedy
relish for a few volumes of Voyages and Travels —
I forget what, now — that were on those shelves ; and
for days and days I can remember to have gone about
my region of our house, armed with the centre-piece
out of an old set of boot-trees — the perfect realisation
of Captain Somebody, of the Royal British Navy, in
danger of being beset by savages, and resolved to sell
his life at a great price. The Captain never lost
dignity, from having his ears boxed with the Latin
Grammar. I did ; but the Captain was a Captain
and a hero, in despite of all the grammars of all the
languages in the world, dead or alive.

This was my only and my constant comfort. When
I think of it, the picture always rises in my mind, of
a summer evening, the boys at play in the churchyard,
and I sitting on my bed, reading as if for life. Every
barn in the neighbourhood, every stone in the church,
and every foot of the churchyard, had some association
of its own, in my mind, connected with these books,
and stood for some locality made famous in them.
I have seen Tom Pipes go climbing up the church-
steeple ; I have watched Strap, with the knapsack on
his back, stopping to rest himself upon the wicket-
gate ; and I know that Commodore Trunnion held
that club with Mr. Pickle, in the parlour of our little
village alehouse.

Davtd Copperfield



719



CHARLES DICKENS



422 The Widow at the Qrave

SHE was looking at a humble stone which told of
a young man who had died at twenty-three years
old, fifty-five years ago, when she heard a faltering
step approaching, and looking round saw a feeble
woman bent with the weight of years, who tottered
to the foot of that same grave and asked her to read
the writing on the stone. The old woman thanked
her when she had done, saying that she had had the
words by heart for many a long, long year, but could
not see them now.

' Were you his mother ? ' said the child.
' I was his wife, my dear.'

She the wife of a young man of three-and-twenty !
Ah, true ! It was fifty-five years ago.

' You wonder to hear me say that,' remarked the
old woman, shaking her head. ' You're not the first.
Older folk than you have wondered at the same thing
before now. Yes, I was his wife. Death doesn't
change us more than life, my dear.'

' Do you come here often f ' asked the child.

' I sit here very often in the summer-time,' she
answered. ' I used to come here once to cry and mourn,
but that was a weary while ago, bless God ! '

' I pluck the daisies as they grow, and take them
home,' said the old woman after a short silence. ' I like
no flowers so well as these, and haven't for five-and-fifty
years. It's a long time, and I'm getting very old ! '

Then growing garrulous upon a theme which was
new to one listener though it were but a child, she told
her how she had wept and moaned and prayed to die
herself, when this happened ; and how when she first
came to that place, a young creature strong in love
720



CHARLES DICKENS

and grief, she had hoped that her heart was breaking
as it seemed to be. But that time passed by, and al-
though she continued to be sad when she came there,
still she could bear to come, and so went on until
it was pain no longer, but a solemn pleasure, and
a duty she had learned to like. And now that five-
and-fifty years were gone, she spoke of the dead man
as if he had been her son or grandson, with a kind of
pity for his youth, growing out of her own old age,
and an exalting of his strength and manly beauty as
compared with her own weakness and decay ; and yet
she spoke about him as her husband too, and thinking
of herself in connexion with him, as she used to be
and not as she was now, talked of their meeting in
another world, as if he were dead but yesterday, and
she, separated from her former self, were thinking of
the happiness of that comely girl who seemed to have
died with him.

The Old Curiosity Shop

423 <£Mrs. (jamp on Steam- Engines

IT was so amusing, that Tom, with Ruth upon his
arm, stood looking down from the wharf, as nearly
regardless as it was in the nature of flesh and blood
to be, of an elderly lady behind him, who had brought
a large umbrella with her, and didn't know what to
do with it. This tremendous instrument had a hooked
handle ; and its vicinity was first made known to him
by a painful pressure on the windpipe, consequent
upon its having caught him round the throat. Soon
after disengaging himself with perfect good humour,
he had a sensation of the ferule in his back ; immediately
afterwards, of the hook entangling his ankles ; then

721



CHARLES DICKENS



of the umbrella generally, wandering about his hat,
and flapping at it like a great bird ; and, lastly, of
a poke or thrust below the ribs, which gave him such
exceeding anguish, that he could not refrain from
turning round to offer a mild remonstrance.

Upon his turning round, he found the owner of the
umbrella struggling on tip-toe, with a countenance
expressive of violent animosity, to look down upon
the steam-boats ; from which he inferred that she had
attacked him, standing in the front row, by design,
and as her natural enemy.

' What a very ill-natured person you must be ! '
said Tom.

The lady cried out fiercely, ' Where 's the pelisse ! '
meaning the constabulary — and went on to say, shaking
the handle of the umbrella at Tom, that but for them
fellers never being in the way when they was wanted,
she'd have given him in charge, she would.

' If they greased their whiskers less, and minded the
duties which they're paid so heavy for, a little more,'
she observed, ' no one needn't be drove mad by
scrouding so ! '

She had been grievously knocked about, no doubt,
for her bonnet was bent into the shape of a cocked
hat. Being a fat little woman, too, she was in a state
of great exhaustion and intense heat. Instead of
pursuing the altercation, therefore, Tom civilly in-
quired what boat she wanted to go on board of ?

' I suppose,' returned the lady, ' as nobody but
yourself can want to look at a steam package, without
wanting to go a-boarding of it, can they ! Booby ! '

' Which one do you want to look at then f ' said
Tom. ' We'll make room for you if we can. Don't
be so ill-tempered.'
722



CHARLES DICKENS

' No blessed creetur as ever I was with in trying
times,' returned the lady, somewhat softened, ' and
they're a many in their numbers, ever brought it
as a charge again myself that I was anythin' but mild
and equal in my spirits. Never mind a-contradicting
of me, if you seems to feel it does you good, ma'am,
I often says, for well you know that Sairey may be
trusted not to give it back again. But I will not
denige that I am worrited and wexed this day, and with
good reagion, Lord forbid ! '

By this time, Mrs. Gamp (for it was no other than
that experienced practitioner) had, with Tom's assis-
tance, squeezed and worked herself into a small corner
between Ruth and the rail ; where, after breathing
very hard for some little time, and performing a short
series of dangerous evolutions with her umbrella, she
managed to establish herself pretty comfortably.

' And which of all them smoking monsters is the
Ankworks boat, I wonder. Goodness me ! ' cried
Mrs. Gamp.

' What boat did you want ? ' asked Ruth.

' The Ankworks package,' Mrs. Gamp replied.
' I will not deceive you, my sweet. Why should I ? '

' That is the Antwerp packet in the middle,' said
Ruth.

' And I wish it was in Jonadge's belly, I do,' cried
Mrs. Gamp ; appearing to confound the prophet
with the whale in this miraculous aspiration.

Ruth said nothing in reply ; but, as Mrs. Gamp,
laying her chin against the cool iron of the rail,
continued to look intently at the Antwerp boat, and
every now and then to give a little groan, she inquired
whether any child of hers was going abroad that
morning f Or perhaps her husband, she said kindly.

723



CHARLES DICKENS



'Which shows,' said Mrs. Gamp, casting up her
eyes, ' what a little way you've travelled into this wale
of life, my dear young creetur ! As a good friend of
mine has frequent made remark to me, which her name,
my love, is Harris, Mrs. Harris through the square and
up the steps a-turnin' round by the tobacker shop,
" Oh Sairey, Sairey, little do we know wot lays afore
us i " " Mrs. Harris, ma'am," I says, " not much,
it 's true, but more than you suppoge. Our calcila-
tions, ma'am," I says, " respectin' wot the number of
a family will be, comes most times within one, and
oftener than you would suppoge, exact." " Sairey,"
says Mrs. Harris, in a awful way, " Tell me wot is my
indiwidgle number." " No, Mrs. Harris," I says to
her, " ex-cuge me, if you please. My own," I says,
" has fallen out of three-pair backs, and had damp
doorsteps settled on their lungs, and one was turned
up smilin' in a bedstead, unbeknown. Therefore,
ma'am," I says, " seek not to proticipate, but take 'em
as they come and as they go." Mine,' said Mrs. Gamp,
' mine is all gone, my dear young chick. And as to
husbands, there's a wooden leg gone hkeways home
to its account, which in its constancy of walkin'
into wine vaults, and never comin' out again 'till
fetched by force, was quite as weak as flesh, if not
weaker.'

When she had delivered this oration, Mrs. Gamp
leaned her chin upon the cool iron again ; and looking
intently at the Antwerp packet, shook her head and
groaned.

' I wouldn't,' said Mrs. Gamp, ' I wouldn't be a man
and have such a think upon my mind ! — but nobody
as owned the name of man, could do it ! '

Tom and his sister glanced at each other ; and Ruth,
724



CHARLES DICKENS



after a moment's hesitation, asked Mrs. Gamp what
troubled her so much.

' My dear,' returned that lady, dropping her voice,
' you are single, ain't you f '

Ruth laughed, blushed, and said ' Yes.'

' Worse luck,' proceeded Mrs. Gamp, ' for all
parties ! But others is married, and m the marriage
state ; and there is a dear young creetur a-comin' down
this mornin' to that very package, which is no more
fit to trust herself to sea, than nothin' is ! '

She paused here to look over the deck of the packet
in question, and on the steps leading down to it,
and on the gangways. Seeming to have thus assured
herself that the object of her commiseration had not
yet arrived, she raised her eyes gradually up to the
top of the escape-pipe, and indignantly apostrophised
the vessel :

' Oh, drat you ! ' said Mrs. Gamp, shaking her
umbrella at it, ' you're a nice spluttering nisy monster
for a delicate young creetur to go and be a passinger
by ; ain't you ! You never do no harm in that way,
do you ? With your hammering, and roaring, and
hissing, and lamp-iling, you brute ! Them confugion
steamers,' said Mrs. Gamp, shaking her umbrella again,
' has done more to throw us out of our reg'lar work
and bring ewents on at times when nobody counted
on 'em (especially them screeching railroad ones),
than all the other frights that ever was took. I have
heerd of one young man, a guard upon a railway, only
three years opened — well does Mrs. Harris know him,
which indeed he is her own relation by her sister's
marriage with a master sawyer — as is godfather at this
present time to six-and-twenty blessed little strangers,
equally unexpected, and all on 'em named after the

725



CHARLES DICKENS



Ingeins as was the cause. Ugh ! ' said Mrs. Gamp,
resuming her apostrophe, ' one might easy know you
was a man's inwention, from your disregardlessness of
the weakness of our naturs, so one might, you brute ! '

Martin Chuzzleml

424 The 'Vale Young (gentleman

WHEN I had exhausted the garden and a green-
house with nothing in it but a fallen-down
grape-vine and some bottles, I found myself in the
dismal corner upon which I had looked out of window.
Never questioning for a moment that the house was
now empty, I looked in at another window, and
found myself, to my great surprise, exchanging a broad
stare with a pale young gentleman with red eyelids
and light hair.

This pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and
reappeared beside me. He had been at his books
when I had found myself staring at him, and I now
saw that he was inky.

' Halloa ! ' said he, ' young fellow ! '
Halloa being a general observation which I had
usually observed to be best answered by itself, / said
' Halloa ! ' politely omitting young fellow.
' Who let you in ? ' said he.
' Miss Estella.'

' Who gave you leave to prowl about ? '
' Miss Estella.'

' Come and fight,' said the pale young gentle-
man.

What could I do but follow him? I have often
asked myself the question since : but what else could
I do ? His manner was so final and I was so astonished,
736



CHARLES DICKENS



that I followed where he led, as if I had been under
a spell.

' Stop a minute, though,' he said, wheeling round
before we had gone many paces. ' I ought to give you
a reason for fighting, too. There it is ! ' In a most
irritating manner he instantly slapped his hands
against one another, daintily flung one of his legs
up behind him, pulled my hair, slapped his hands
again, dipped his head, and butted it into my stomach.

The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides
that it was unquestionably to be regarded in the light
of a liberty, was particularly disagreeable just after
bread and meat. I therefore hit out at him, and was
going to hit out again, when he said, ' Aha ! Would
you f ' and began dancing backwards and forwards in
a manner quite unparalleled within my limited
experience.

' Laws of the game ! ' said he. Here, he skipped
from his left leg on to his right. ' Regular rules ! '
Here, he skipped from his right leg on to his left.
' Come to the ground, and go through the prelimin-
aries ! ' Here, he dodged backwards and forwards,
and did all sorts of things while I looked helplessly
at him.

I was secretly afraid of him when I saw him so
dexterous ; but I felt morally and physically convinced
that his light head of hair could have had no business
in the pit of my stomach, and that I had a right to
consider it irrelevant when so obtruded on my atten-
tion. Therefore, I followed him without a word, to
a retired nook of the garden, formed by the junction
of two walls and screened by some rubbish. On his
asking me if I was satisfied with the ground, and on
my replying Yes, he begged my leave to absent himself

7»7



CHARLES DICKENS



for a moment, and quickly returned with a bottle of
water and a sponge dipped in vinegar. ' Available
for both,' he said, placing these against the wall. And
then fell to pulling off, not only his jacket and waist-
coat, but his shirt too, in a manner at once light-
hearted, business-like, and blood-thirsty.

Although he did not look very healthy — having
pimples on his face, and a breaking out on his mouth —
these dreadful preparations quite appalled me. I
judged him to be about my own age, but he was much
taller, and he had a way of spinning himself about
that was full of appearance. For the rest, he was
a young gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded
for battle), with his elbows, knees, wrists, and heels
considerably in advance of the rest of him as to
development.

My heart failed me when I saw him squaring at
me with every demonstration of mechanical nicety,
and eyeing my anatomy as if he were minutely choosing
his bone. I never have been so surprised in my life,
as I was when I let out the first blow, and saw him
lying on his back, looking up at me with a bloody nose
and his face exceedingly fore-shortened.

But he was on his feet directly, and after sponging
himself with a great show of dexterity began squaring
again. The second greatest surprise I have ever had
in my life was seeing him on his back again, looking
up at me out of a black eye.

His spirit inspired me with great respect. He seemed
to have no strength, and he never once hit me hard,
and he was always knocked down ; but he would be up
again in a moment, sponging himself or drinking out
of the water-bottle, with the greatest satisfaction in
seconding himself according to form, and then came
728



CHARLES DICKENS



at me with an air and a show that made me believe he
really was going to do for me at last. He got heavily
bruised, for I am sorry to record that the more I hit
him, the harder I hit him ; but he came up again
and again and again, until at last he got a bad fall
with the back of his head against the wall. Even after
that crisis in our affairs, he got up and turned round
and round confusedly a few times, not knowing where
I was ; but finally went on his knees to his sponge
and threw it up : at the same time panting out,
' That means you have won.'

He seemed so brave and innocent, that although
I had not proposed the contest, I felt but a gloomy
satisfaction in my victory. Indeed, I go so far as to
hope that I regarded myself while dressing, as a species
of savage young wolf, or other wild beast. However,
I got dressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face at
intervals, and I said, ' Can I help you ? ' and he said,
' No thankee,' and I said, ' Good afternoon,' and he
said, ' Same to you.'

Great Expectations

425 The Haymakers

SUCH was the surrounding of one City churchyard
that I saw last summer, on a Volunteering
Saturday evening towards eight of the clock, when
with astonishment I beheld an old old man and an
old old woman in it, making hay. Yes, of all occupa-
tions in this world, making hay ! It was a very confined
patch of churchyard lying between Gracechurch-street
and the Tower, capable of yielding, say an apronful
of hay. By what means the old old man and woman
had got into it, with an almost toothless hay-making

7*9



CHARLES DICKENS

rake, I could not fathom. No open window was
within view ; no window at all was within view,
sufficiently near the ground to have enabled their old
legs to descend from it ; the rusty churchyard-gate
was locked, the mouldy church was locked. Gravely
among the graves, they made hay, all alone by them-
selves. They looked like Time and his wife. There
was but the one rake between them, and they both
had hold of it in a pastorally-loving manner, and there
was hay on the old woman's black bonnet, as if the
old man had recently been playful. The old man was
quite an obsolete old man, in knee-breeches and coarse
grey stockings, and the old woman wore mittens like
unto his stockings in texture and in colour. They took
no heed of me as I looked on, unable to account for
them. The old woman was much too bright for a pew-
opener, the old man much too meek for a beadle. On
an old tombstone in the foreground between me and
them, were two cherubim ; but for those celestial
embellishments being represented as having no possible
use for knee-breeches, stockings, or mittens, I should
have compared them with the hay-makers, and sought
a likeness. I coughed and awoke the echoes, but the
hay-makers never looked at me. They used the rake
with a measured action, drawing the scanty crop
towards them ; and so I was fain to leave them under
three yards and a half of darkening sky, gravely making
hay among the graves, all alone by themselves.

The Uncommercial Traveller



730



MARK PATTISON

1813-1884

426 T/ie Instinct of 'Pilgrimage

THE truth is, that that magnetic influence which
irresistibly draws our feet to spots on which our
imagination has long fed, is an instinct of our nature,
and that in this, as in other respects, the Church did
but take into her service, and propose a fitting object
to, an impulse which will vent itself in some form or
other. There have been pilgrims both before and
since the ages of faith, the ages when the Church
bore sway over every action of life. Only she sent
them to the tombs of saints, and martyrs, and filled
their paths with sacred associations, instead of leaving
them to roam at will in search of the relics of pagans or
infidels, with Byron or Rousseau in their pockets as the
companions of their way. The Church cannot be said
to have created pilgrimages, or even to have encouraged
them — she suffered them, and gave them a direction
which might, at least, edify. But qui multum peregri-
nantur, raro sanctificantur is her doctrine. . .

This is a taste quite distinct from a love of grand
scenery — a love of nature. For this we must go to
particular spots of the earth, where there are moun-
tains, rocks, lakes. North America or South Africa,
lands the least interesting to the historical traveller,
will supply the richest objects to the lover of scenery.
It is the old historical lands of Europe that the lover
of history longs to explore. None of these are more
attractive to him than France. Its natural scenery,
pre-eminently in Western Europe at least, is tame, and
uniform ; but rich beyond all others in the traces of
the men of old, and the associations of the past. For

73i



MARK PATTISON



ourselves, at least were we younger, we could gaze
for hours, with Froissart on our knee, over that bound-
less plain of Languedoc, convicted of all guide-books
of being arid, brown, and wholly uninteresting. This
old Languedoc, Roman and Gothic still. ' Descend
from Cahors,' says Michelet, ' its slopes clothed with
vines, and you will find yourself in the country of the
mulberries. Spread before you a landscape of some
thirty or forty leagues, a vast ocean of tillage, a con-
fused mass, losing itself in the vapour of the distant
horizon, above which rises the fantastic outline of the
Pyrenees with their silvery peaks. Oxen, yoked
together by the horns, slowly, beneath the eye of an
ardent sun, labour this fertile valley. At mid-day,
a storm ; the ground becomes a lake ; in an hour
the sun has restored it to its state of dust. At
night you enter some big dull town ; Toulouse, if
you will. . .

Nor, we hope, are we singular. Among the shoals
of the frivolous and dissipated which this country
annually discharges upon the Continent, there are,
we would hope, to be found some few thoughtful
travellers who are attracted to foreign lands by a love
of the localities associated with the memory of the
great and the saintly of ancient times. Such is perhaps
the nearest approach we may make to the motives of
the Christian pilgrim. Such a voyager, if it has ever
been his hap to turn his feet to Orleans, and descending
to the water-side to embark in one of the tiny iron
steamers belonging to M. Larochejacquelin, glide
with sinuous course down the Loire, its banks still clad
with the broom which gives their title to the Planta-
genets, the sunny and laughing landscape once only
gloomily broken as we sweep beneath the frowning
73 2



MARK PATTISON



Blois ; such a voyager will seldom feel this spell upon
his spirit more powerfully than when, before sunset
of a long summer's day, the little vessel is moored to
the quay of Tours.

Essays : Gregory of Tours

JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY

1814-1877

42 j William of Orange

HE possessed, too, that which to the heathen
philosopher seemed the greatest good — the
sound mind in the sound body. His physical frame was
after death found so perfect that a long life might have
been in store for him, notwithstanding all which he
had endured. The desperate illness of 1574, the fright-
ful gunshot wound inflicted by Jaureguy in 1582, had
left no traces. The physicians pronounced that his
body presented an aspect of perfect health. His tem-
perament was cheerful. At table, the pleasures of
which, in moderation, were his only relaxation, he
was always animated and merry, and this jocoseness
was partly natural, partly intentional. In the darkest
hours of his country's trial, he affected a serenity
which he was far from feeling, so that his apparent
gaiety at momentous epochs was even censured by
dullards, who could not comprehend its philosophy,
nor applaud the flippancy of William the Silent.

He went through life bearing the load of a people's
sorrows upon his shoulders with a smiling face. Their
name was the last word upon his lips, save the simple
affirmative, with which the soldier who had been
battling for the right all his lifetime, commended his
soul in dying ' to his great Captain, Christ.' The

733



JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY



people were grateful and affectionate, for they trusted
the character of their ' Father William,' and not all
the clouds which calumny could collect ever dimmed
to their eyes the radiance of that lofty mind to which
they were accustomed, in their darkest calamities,
to look for light. As long as he lived, he was the
guiding-star of a brave nation, and when he died the
little children cried in the streets.

Rise of the Dutch Republic

CHARLES READE

1814-1884

428 The (fallows

AT the edge of the wood they came upon something
jLx. so mysterious that they stopped to gaze at it,
before going up to it. Two white pillars rose in the
air, distant a few paces from each other ; and between
them stood many figures, that looked like human
forms.

' I go no farther till I know what this is,' said Gerard,
in an agitated whisper. ' Are they effigies of the saints,
for men to pray to on the road? or live robbers
waiting to shoot down honest travellers ? Nay, living
men they cannot be, for they stand on nothing that
I see. Oh ! Denys, let us turn back till daybreak :
this is no mortal sight.'

Denys halted, and peered long and keenly. ' They
are men,' said he, at last. Gerard was for turning
back all the more.

' But men that will never hurt us, nor we them.
Look not to their feet for that they stand on ! '

' Where, then, i' the name of all the saints ? '

' Look over their heads,' said Denys, gravely.

734



CHARLES READE



Following this direction, Gerard presently discerned
the outline of a dark wooden beam passing from pillar
to pillar ; and, as the pair got nearer, walking now on
tiptoe, one by one dark snake-like cords came out in
the moonlight, each pendent from the beam to a dead
man, and tight as wire.

Now as they came under this awful monument of
crime and wholesale vengeance, a light air swept by,
and several of the corpses swung, or gently gyrated,
and every rope creaked. Gerard shuddered at this
ghastly salute. So thoroughly had the gibbet, with its
sickening load, seized and held their eyes, that it was
but now they perceived a fire right underneath, and
a living figure sitting huddled over it. His axe lay
beside him, the bright blade shining red in the glow.
He was asleep.

Gerard started, but Denys only whispered, ' Cour-
age, comrade, here is a fire.'

' Ay ! but there is a man at it.'

' There will soon be three : ' and he began to heap
some wood on it that the watcher had prepared ;
during which the prudent Gerard seized the man's
axe, and sat down tight on it, grasping his own, and
examining the sleeper. There was nothing outwardly
distinctive in the man. He wore the dress of the
country folk, and the hat of the district, a three-
cornered hat called a Brunswicker, stiff enough to
turn a sword-cut, and with a thick brass hat-band.
The weight of the whole thing had turned his ears
entirely down, like a fancy rabbit's in our century ;
but even this, though it spoiled him as a man, was
nothing remarkable. They had of late met scores of
these dog's-eared rustics. The peculiarity was — this
clown watching under a laden gallows. What for ?

735



CHARLES READE



Denys, if he felt curious, would not show it ; he
took out two bears' ears from his bundle, and running
sticks through them began to toast them. ' 'Twill be
eating coined money,' said he ; ' for the burgomaster
of Dusseldorf had given us a rix-dollar for these ears,
as proving the death of their owners ; but better
a lean purse than a lere stomach.'

' Unhappy man ! ' cried Gerard, ' could you eat
food here ? '

'Where the fire is lighted there must the meat
roast, and where it roasts there must it be eaten ; for
nought travels worse than your roasted meat.'

' Well, eat thou, Denys, an thou canst ! but I am
cold and sick ; there is no room for hunger in my heart
after what mine eyes have seen,' and he shuddered
over the fire ; ' oh ! how they creak ! and who is this
man I wonder ? what an ill-favoured churl ! '

Denys examined him like a connoisseur looking at
a picture ; and in due course delivered judgment.
' I take him to be of the refuse of that company,
whereof these (pointing carelessly upward) were the
cream, and so ran their heads into danger.'

' At that rate, why not stun him before he wakes f '
and Gerard fidgeted where he sat.

Denys opened his eyes with humorous surprise.
' For one who sets up for a milksop you have the readiest
hand. Why should two stun one ? tush ! he wakes ;
note now what he says at waking, and tell me.'

These last words were hardly whispered when the
watcher opened his eyes. At sight of the fire made
up, and two strangers eyeing him keenly, he stared,
and there was a severe and pretty successful effort
to be calm ; still a perceptible tremor ran all over
him. Soon he manned himself, and said gruffly,
736



CHARLES READE



' Good morrow.' But, at the very moment of saying
it, he missed his axe, and saw how Gerard was sitting
upon it with his own laid ready to his hand. He lost
countenance again directly. Denys smiled grimly at
this bit of by-play.

' Good morrow ! ' said Gerard quietly, keeping his
eye on him.

The watcher was now too ill at ease to be silent.
' You make free with my fire,' said he ; but he added
in a somewhat faltering voice, ' you are welcome.'

Denys whispered Gerard. The watcher eyed them
askant.

' My comrade says, sith we share your fire, you shall
share his meat.'

' So be it,' said the man, warmly. ' I have half
a kid hanging on a bush hard by, I'll go fetch it ; '
and he arose with a cheerful and obliging countenance,
and was retiring.

Denys caught up his cross-bow, and levelled it at
his head. The man fell on his knees.

Denys lowered his weapon, and pointed him back
to his place. He rose and went back slowly and
unsteadily, like one disjointed ; and sick at heart as
the mouse, that the cat lets go a little way, and then
darts and replaces.

' Sit down, friend,' said Denys grimly, in French.

The man obeyed finger and tone, though he knew
not a word of French.

' Tell him the fire is not big enough for more than
three. He will take my meaning.'

This being communicated by Gerard, the man
grinned ; ever since Denys spoke he had seemed
greatly relieved. ' I wist not ye were strangers,' said
he to Gerard.

2830 B b 737



CHARLES READE



Denys cut a piece of bear's ear, and offered it with
grace to him he had just levelled cross-bow at.

He took it calmly, and drew a piece of bread from
his wallet, and divided it with the pair. Nay, more,
he winked and thrust his hand into the heap of leaves
he sat on (Gerard grasped his axe ready to brain him)
and produced a leathern bottle holding full two
gallons. He put it to his mouth, and drank their
healths, then handed it to Gerard ; he passed it
untouched to Denys.

' Mort de ma vie ! ' cried the soldier, ' it is Rhenish
wine, and fit for the gullet of an archbishop. Here 's to
thee, thou prince of good fellows, wishing thee a short
life and a merry one ! Come, Gerard, sup ! sup !
Pshaw, never heed them, man ! they heed not thee.
Natheless, did I hang over such a skin of Rhenish as
this, and three churls sat beneath a drinking it and
offered me not a drop, I'd soon be down among them.'

' Denys ! Denys ! '

1 My spirit would cut the cord, and womp would
come my body amongst ye, with a hand on the bottle,
and one eye winking, t'other '

Gerard started up with a cry of horror and his
fingers to his ears, and was running from the place,
when his eye fell on the watcher's axe. The tangible
danger brought him back. He sat down again on the
axe with his fingers in his ears.

' Courage, l'ami, le diable est mort ! ' shouted
Denys gaily, and offered him a piece of bear's ear, put
it right under his nose as he stopped his ears. Gerard
turned his head away with loathing. ' Wine ! ' he
gasped. ' Heaven knows I have much need of it, with
such companions as thee and '

He took a long draught of the Rhenish wine : it
738



CHARLES READE



ran glowing through his veins, and warmed and
strengthened his heart ; but could not check his
tremors whenever a gust of wind came. As for Denys
and the other, they feasted recklessly, and plied the
bottle unceasingly, and drank healths and caroused
beneath that creaking sepulchre and its ghastly
tenants.

The Cloister and the Hearth

429 The English Skylark in ^Australia

THE house was thatched and whitewashed, and
English was written on it and on every foot of
ground round it. A furze bush had been planted by
the door. Vertical oak palings were the fence, with
a five-barred gate in the middle of them. From the
little plantation all the magnificent trees and shrubs
of Australia had been excluded with amazing resolution
and consistency, and oak and ash reigned safe from
overtowenng rivals. They passed to the back of the
house, and there George's countenance fell a little,
for on the oval grass-plot and gravel-walk he found from
thirty to forty rough fellows, most of them diggers.

' Ah ! well,' said he, on reflection, ' we could not
expect to have it all to ourselves, and indeed it would
be a sin to wish it, you know. Now, Tom, come this
way ; here it is — here it is — there.' Tom looked up,
and in a gigantic cage was a light-brown bird. . . Like
most singers, he kept them waiting a bit. But at
last, just at noon, when the mistress of the house
had warranted him to sing, the little feathered exile
began as it were to tune his pipes. The savage men
gathered round the cage that moment, and amidst
a dead stillness the bird uttered some very uncertain

739



CHARLES READE



chirps, but after a while he seemed to revive his
memories, and call his ancient cadences back to him
one by one, and string them sotto voce.

And then the same sun that had warmed his little
heart at home came glowing down on him here, and
he gave music back for it more and more, till at last,
amidst breathless silence and glistening eyes of the
rough diggers hanging on his voice, out burst in that
distant land his English song.

It swelled his little throat and gushed from him
with thrilling force and plenty, and every time he
checked his song to think of its theme, the green
meadows, the quiet stealing streams, the clover he
first soared from and the Spring he sang so well, a loud
sigh from many a rough bosom, many a wild and wicked
heart, told how tight the listeners had held their
breath to hear him ; and when he swelled with song
again, and poured with all his soul the green meadows,
the quiet brooks, the honey clover, and the English
Spring, the rugged mouths opened and so stayed, and
the shaggy lips trembled, and more than one drop
trickled from fierce unbridled hearts down bronzed
and rugged cheeks. Dulce domum !

And these shaggy men, full of oaths and strife and
cupidity, had once been white-headed boys, and had
strolled about the English fields with little sisters
and little brothers, and seen the lark rise, and heard
him sing this very song. The little playmates lay in
the churchyard, and they were full of oaths and drink
and lusts and remorses, but no note was changed in
this immortal song. And so for a moment or two
years of vice rolled away like a dark cloud from the
memory, and the past shone out in the sortg-shine ;
they came back, bright as the immortal notes that
740



CHARLES READE



lighted them, those faded pictures and those fleeted
days ; the cottage, the old mother's tears when he
left her without one grain of sorrow ; the village
church and its simple chimes ; the clover field hard
by in which he lay and gambolled, while the lark
praised God over-head, the chubby playmates that
never grew to be wicked, the sweet hours of youth, and
innocence, and home !

/( ts Never too Late to Mend

RICHARD WILLIAM CHURCH,
DEAN OF ST. PAUL'S

1815-1890

430 Spenser's Ideal Qe title man

THE unity of a story, or an allegory — that chain
and backbone of continuous interest, implying
a progress and leading up to a climax, which holds
together the great poems of the world, the Iliad and
Odyssey, the JEneid, the Commedia, the Paradise Lost,
the Jerusalem Delivered — this is wanting in the Faery
Queen. The unity is one of character and its ideal.
That character of the completed man, raised above
what is poor and low, and governed by noble tempers
and pure principles, has in Spenser two conspicuous
elements. In the first place, it is based on manliness.
In the personages which illustrate the different virtues,
Holiness, Justice, Courtesy, and the rest, the distinction
is not in nicely discriminated features or shades of
expression, but in the trials and the occasions which
call forth a particular action or effort : yet the manli-
ness which is at the foundation of all that is good in
them is a universal quality common to them all,
rooted and imbedded in the governing idea or standard

741



RICHARD WILLIAM CHURCH



of moral character in the poem. It is not merely
courage, it is not merely energy, it is not merely
strength. It is the quality of soul which frankly
accepts the conditions in human life, of labour, of
obedience, of effort, of unequal success ; which does
not quarrel with them or evade them, but takes for
granted with unquestioning alacrity that man is
called — by his call to high aims and destiny — to a
continual struggle with difficulty, with pain, with
evil, and makes it the point of honour not to be dis-
mayed or wearied out by them. It is a cheerful
and serious willingness for hard work and endurance,
as being inevitable and very bearable necessities,
together with even a pleasure in encountering trials
which put a man on his mettle, an enjoyment of the
contest and the risk, even in play. It is the quality
which seizes on the paramount idea of duty, as some-
thing which leaves a man no choice ; which despises
and breaks through the inferior considerations and
motives — trouble, uncertainty, doubt, curiosity —
which hang about and impede duty ; which is im-
patient with the idleness and childishness of a life of
mere amusement, or mere looking on, of continued
and self-satisfied levity, of vacillation, of clever and
ingenious trifling.

Spenser

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

1815-1882

431 The Tlumstead Foxes

THERE was a string of narrow woods called Plum-
stead Coppices which ran from a point near the
church right across the parish, dividing the arch-
742



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



deacon's land from the Ullathorne estate, and these
coppices, or belts of woodland, belonged to the
archdeacon. On the morning of which we are speak-
ing, the archdeacon, mounted on his cob, still thinking
of his son's iniquity and of his own fixed resolve to
punish him as he had said that he would punish him,
opened with his whip a woodland gate, from which
a green muddy lane led through the trees up to the
house of his gamekeeper. The man's wife was ill,
and in his ordinary way of business the archdeacon was
about to call and ask after her health. At the door
of the cottage he found the man, who was woodman
as well as gamekeeper, and was responsible for fences
and faggots, as well as for foxes and pheasants' eggs.

' How 's Martha, Flurry? ' said the archdeacon.

' Thanking your reverence, she be a deal improved
since the mistress was here — last Tuesday it was,
I think.'

' I'm glad of that. It was only rheumatism, I sup-
pose i '

' Just a tich of fever with it, your reverence, the
doctor said.'

' Tell her I was asking after it. I won't mind
getting down to-day, as I am rather busy. She has
had what she wanted from the house? '

' The mistress has been very good in that way.
She always is, God bless her ! '

' Good-day to you, Flurry. I'll ask Mr. Sims to
come and read to her a bit this afternoon, or to-morrow
morning.'

The archdeacon kept two curates, and Mr. Sims
was one of them.

' She'll take it very kindly, your reverence. But
while you are here, sir, there 's just a word I'd like

743



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



to say. I didn't happen to catch Mr. Henry when
he was here the other day.'

' Never mind Mr. Henry ; what is it you have
to say ? '

' I do think, I do indeed, sir, that Mr. Thome's
man ain't dealing fairly along of the foxes. I wouldn't
say a word about it, only that Mr. Henry is so par-
ticular.'

' What about the foxes? What is he doing with
the foxes f '

' Well, sir, he 's a trapping on 'em. He is, indeed,
your reverence. I wouldn't speak if I warn't well
nigh mortial sure.'

Now the archdeacon had never been a hunting
man, though in his early days many a clergyman had
been in the habit of hunting without losing his clerical
character by doing so ; but he had lived all his life
among gentlemen in a hunting county, and had his
own very strong ideas about the trapping of foxes.
Foxes first, and pheasants afterwards, had always been
the rule with him as to any land of which he himself
had had the management. . . But now his heart was
not with the foxes — and especially not with the foxes
on behalf of his son Henry. ' I can't have any meddling
with Mr. Thorne,' he said ; ' I can't, and I won't.'

' But I don't suppose it can be Mr. Thome's order,
your reverence ; and Mr. Henry is so particular.'

' Of course it isn't Mr. Thome's order. Mr. Thorne
has been a hunting man all his life.'

' But he have guv' up now, your reverence. He
ain't a hunted these two years.'

' I'm sure he wouldn't have the foxes trapped.'

4 Not if he knowed it, he wouldn't, your reverence.
A gentleman of the likes of him, who 's been a hunting

744



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



over fifty year, wouldn't do the likes of that ; but the
foxes is trapped, and Mr. Henry '11 be a putting it
on me if I don't speak out. They is Plumstead foxes
too ; and a vixen was trapped just across the field
yonder, in Goshall Springs, no later than yesterday
morning.' Flurry was now thoroughly in earnest ;
and, indeed, the trapping of a vixen in February is
a serious thing.

' Goshall Springs don't belong to me,' said the
archdeacon.

' No, your reverence ; they're on the Ullathorne
property. But a word from your reverence would do
it. Mr. Henry thinks more of the foxes than any-
thing. The last word he told me was that it would
break his heart if he saw the coppices drawn blank.' . .

' I will have no meddling in the matter, Flurry.
Whether there are foxes or whether there are not, is
matter of no great moment. I will not have a word
said to annoy Mr. Thome.'

Then he rode away, back through the wood and out
on to the road, and the horse walked with him leisurely
on, whither the archdeacon hardly knew — for he was
thinking, thinking, thinking. . .

He could have heard nothing of his son to stir him
more in his favour than this strong evidence of his
partiality for foxes. I do not mean it to be under-
stood that the archdeacon regarded foxes as better
than active charity, or a contented mind, or a meek
spirit, or than self-denying temperance. No doubt
all these virtues did hold in his mind their proper
place, altogether beyond contamination of foxes.
But he had prided himself on thinking that his son
should be a country gentleman, and, probably nothing
doubting as to the major's active charity and other

745



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



virtues, was delighted to receive evidence of those
tastes which he had ever wished to encourage in his
son's character. Or rather, such evidence would have
delighted him at any other time than the present.
Now it only added more gall to his cup.

' Why should he teach himself to care for such
things, when he has not the spirit to enjoy them,'
said the archdeacon to himself. ' He is a fool — a fool.
A man that has been married once, to go crazy after
a little girl, that has hardly a dress to her back, and
who never was in a drawing-room in her life ! ' . .
On the [next] morning the archdeacon wrote the
following note : ' Dear Thorne, — My man tells me
that foxes have been trapped on Darvell's farm, just
outside the coppices. I know nothing of it myself,
but I am sure you'll look to it. —

Yours always,

T. Grantly.'

The Last Chronicle of Barset

432 <£\fr. Harding's Funeral

THEY buried him in the cathedral which he had
loved so well, and in which nearly all the work of
his life had been done ; and all Barchester was there
to see him laid in his grave within the cloisters. There
was no procession of coaches, no hearse, nor was there
any attempt at funereal pomp. From the dean's side-
door, across the vaulted passage, and into the transept
— over the little step upon which he had so nearly
fallen when last he made his way out of the building —
the coffin was carried on men's shoulders. It was but
a short journey from his bedroom to his grave. But
the bell had been tolling sadly all the morning, and
746



ANTHONY TROLLOPE

the nave and the aisles and the transepts, close up to
the door leading from the transept into the cloister,
were crowded with those who had known the name
and the figure and the voice of Mr. Harding as long
as they had known anything. Up to this day no one
would have said specially that Mr. Harding was
a favourite in the town. He had never been forward
enough in anything to become the acknowledged
possessor of popularity. But, now that he was gone,
men and women told each other how good he had
been. They remembered the sweetness of his smile,
and talked of loving little words which he had spoken
to them — either years ago or the other day, for his
words had always been loving.

The dean and the archdeacon came first, shoulder
to shoulder, and after them came their wives. I do
not know that it was the proper order for mourning,
but it was a touching sight to be seen, and was long
remembered in Barchester. Painful as it was for them,
the two women would be there, and the two sisters
would walk together ; — nor would they go before
their husbands. Then there were the archdeacon's
two sons — for the Rev. Charles Grantly had come to
Plumstead on the occasion. And in the vaulted
passage which runs between the deanery and the end
of the transept, all the chapter, with the choir, the
prebendaries, with the fat old chancellor, the pre-
centor and the minor canons down to the little
choristers — they all were there, and followed in at
the transept door, two by two. And in the transept
they were joined by another clergyman, whom no
one had expected to see that day. The bishop was
there, looking old and worn — almost as though he
was unconscious of what he was doing. Since his

747



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



wife's death no one had seen him out of the palace
or of the palace grounds till that day. But there he
was — and they made way for him into the procession,
behind the two ladies — and the archdeacon, when he
saw it, resolved that there should be peace in his
heart, if peace might be possible.

They made their way into the cloisters where the
grave had been dug — as many as might be allowed
to follow. The place indeed was open to all who
chose to come ; but they who had only slightly
known the man, refrained from pressing upon those
who had a right to stand around his coffin. But
there was one other there whom the faithful chronicler
of Barchester should mention. Before any other one
had reached the spot, the sexton and the verger had
led in between them, among the graves beneath the
cloisters, a blind man, very old, with a wondrous
stoop, but who must have owned a grand stature
before extreme old age had bent him ; and they
placed him sitting on a stone in the corner of the
archway. But as soon as the shuffling of steps reached
his ears, he raised himself with the aid of his stick,
and stood during the service leaning against the
pillar. The blind man was so old that he might
almost have been Mr. Harding's father. This was
John Bunce, a bedesman from Hiram's Hospital —
and none perhaps there had known Mr. Harding
better than he had known him. When the earth had
been thrown on to the coffin, and the service was
over, and they were about to disperse, Mrs. Arabin
went up to the old man, and taking his hand between
hers whispered a word into his ear. ' Oh, Miss
Eleanor,' he said. ' Oh, Miss Eleanor ! ' Within a fort-
night he also was lying within the cathedral precincts.
748



ANTHONY TROLLOPE



And so they buried Mr. Septimus Harding, formerly
Warden of Hiram's Hospital in the city of Barchester,
of whom the chronicler may say that that city never
knew a sweeter gentleman or a better Christian.

The Last Chronicle of Barsel

CHARLOTTE BRONTE

1816-1855

433 On ' Wuthering Heights '

WHETHER it is right or advisable to create
beings like Heathcliff, I do not know : I scarcely
think it is. But this I know ; the writer who possesses
the creative gift owns something of which he is not
always master — something that, at times, strangely
wills and works for itself. He may lay down rules and
devise principles, and to rules and principles it will
perhaps for years lie in subjection ; and then, haply
without any warning of revolt, there comes a time
when it will no longer consent to ' harrow the valleys,
or be bound with a band in the furrow ' — when it
' laughs at the multitude of the city, and regards
not the crying of the driver ' — when, refusing abso-
lutely to make ropes out of sea-sand any longer, it
sets to work on statue-hewing, and you have a Pluto
or a Jove, a Tisiphone or a Psyche, a Mermaid or
a Madonna, as Fate or Inspiration direct. Be the work
grim or glorious, dread or divine, you have little choice
left but quiescent adoption. As for you — the nominal
artist — your share in it has been to work passively
under dictates you neither delivered nor could
question — that would not be uttered at your prayer,
nor suppressed nor changed at your caprice. If the

749



CHARLOTTE BRONTE



result be attractive, the World will praise you, who
little deserve praise ; if it be repulsive, the same World
will blame you, who almost as little deserve blame.

Wuthertng Heights was hewn in. a wild workshop,
with simple tools, out of homely materials. The
statuary found a granite block on a solitary moor ;
gazing thereon, he saw how from the crag might be
elicited a head, savage, swart, sinister ; a form moulded
with at least one element of grandeur — power. He
wrought with a rude chisel, and from no model but
the vision of his meditations. With time and labour,
the crag took human shape ; and there it stands
colossal, dark, and frowning, half statue, half rock :
in the former sense, terrible and goblin-like ; in the
latter, almost beautiful, for its colouring is of mellow
grey, and moorland moss clothes it ; and heath, with
its blooming bells and balmy fragrance, grows faith-
fully close to the giant's foot.

Iniroiuclion to Wuthertng Heights

434 ^Rachel

THE theatre was full — crammed to its roof : royal
and noble were there : palace and hotel had
emptied their inmates into those tiers so thronged
and so hushed. Deeply did I feel myself privileged in
having a place before that stage ; I longed to see
a being of whose powers I had heard reports which
made me conceive peculiar anticipations. I wondered
if she would justify her renown : with strange curiosity,
with feelings severe and austere, yet of riveted interest,
I waited. She was a study of such nature as had not
encountered my eyes yet : a great and new planet
she was : but in what shape f I waited her rising.
75°



CHARLOTTE BRONTE



She rose at nine that December night ; above the
horizon I saw her come. She could shine yet with
pale grandeur and steady might ; but that star verged
already on its judgment day. Seen near — it was a
chaos — hollow, half consumed : an orb perished or
perishing — half lava, half glow.

I had heard this woman termed ' plain,' and I
expected bony harshness and grimness — something
large, angular, sallow. What I saw was the shadow
of a royal Vashti : a queen, fair as the day once,
turned pale now like twilight, and wasted like wax
in flame.

For a while — a long while — I thought it was only
a woman, though an unique woman, who moved in
might and grace before this multitude. By-and-by
I recognised my mistake. Behold ! I found upon her
something neither of woman nor of man : in each of
her eyes sat a devil. These evil forces bore her through
the tragedy, kept up her feeble strength — for she was
but a frail creature ; and as the action rose and the
stir deepened, how wildly they shook her with their
passions of the pit ! They wrote hell on her straight,
haughty brow. They tuned her voice to the note
of torment. They writhed her regal face to a demoniac
mask. Hate, and Murder, and Madness incarnate
she stood.

It was a marvellous sight : a mighty revelation.

It was a spectacle low, horrible, immoral.

Swordsmen thrust through, and dying in their blood
on the arena sand ; bulls goring horses disembowelled,
made a meeker vision for the public — a milder condi-
ment for a people's palate — than Vashti torn by seven
devils : devils which cried sore and rent the tenement
they haunted, but still refused to be exorcised.

7Si



CHARLOTTE BRONTE



Suffering had struck that stage empress ; and she
stood before her audience neither yielding to, nor
enduring, nor in finite measure, resenting it : she stood
locked in struggle, rigid in resistance. She stood, not
dressed, but draped in pale antique folds, long and
regular like sculpture. A background and entourage
and flooring of deepest crimson threw her out, white
like alabaster — like silver : rather, be it said, like
Death. . .

I have said that she does not resent her grief. No ;
the weakness of that word would make it a lie. To
her, what hurts becomes immediately embodied : she
looks on it as a thing that can be attacked, worried
down, torn in shreds. Scarcely a substance herself,
she grapples to conflict with abstractions. Before
calamity she is a tigress ; she rends her woes, shivers
them in compulsed abhorrence. Pain, for her, has no
result in good ; tears water no harvest of wisdom :
on sickness, on death itself, she looks with the eye of
a rebel. Wicked, perhaps, she is, but also she is strong ;
and her strength has conquered Beauty, has overcome
Grace, and bound both at her side, captives peerlessly
fair, and docile as fair. Even in the uttermost frenzy
of energy is each maenad movement royally, imperially,
incedingly upborne. Her hair, flying loose in revel
or war, is still an angel's hair, and glorious under a
halo. Fallen, insurgent, banished, she remembers the
heaven where she rebelled. Heaven's light, following
her exile, pierces its confines, and discloses their
forlorn remoteness.

VtUette



75*



FREDERICK WILLIAM ROBERTSON



1816-1853

435 The Crystal Talace and
Sabbatarianism

1ATELY projects have been devised, one of which
j in importance surpasses all the rest, for providing
places of public recreation for the people : and it has
been announced, with the sanction of government,
that such a place will be held open during a part at
least of the day of rest. By a large section of sincerely
religious persons this announcement has been received
with considerable alarm, and strenuous opposition.
It has seemed to them that such a desecration would
be a national crime : for, holding the sabbath to be
God's sign between Himself and His people, they
cannot but view the desecration of the sign as a for-
feiture of His covenant, and an act which will assuredly
call down national judgments : . . Now when men
are rigorous in the enforcement and reverence paid
to laws positive, the tendency is to a corresponding
indifference to the laws of eternal Right. The written
supersedes in their hearts the moral. The mental
history of the ancient Pharisees who observed the
sabbath, and tithed mint, anise, and cummin, neglect-
ing justice, mercy, and truth, is the history of a most
dangerous, but universal tendency of the human heart.
And so, many a man whose heart swells with what he
thinks pious horror when he sees the letter delivered
or the train run upon the sabbath-day, can pass
through the streets at night, undepressed and unshocked
by the evidences of the wide-spreading profligacy
which has eaten deep into his country's heart. And

753



FREDERICK WILLIAM ROBERTSON

many a man who would gaze upon the domes of a
Crystal Palace, rising above the trees, with somewhat
of the same feeling with which he would look on
a temple dedicated to Juggernaut and who would
fancy that something of the spirit of an ancient
prophet was burning in his bosom, when his lips
pronounced the Woe ! Woe ! of a coming doom,
would sit calmly in a social circle of English life, and
scarcely feel uneasy in listening to its uncharitableness
and its slanders . . . would survey the relations of the
rich and poor in this country, and remain calmly
satisfied that there is nothing false in them, unbrotherly
and wrong. No, my brethren ! let us think clearly
and strongly on this matter. It may be that God has
a controversy with this people. It may be, as they say,
that our Father will chasten us by the sword of the
foreigner. But if He does, and if judgments are in store
for our country, they will fall, — not because the corre-
spondence of the land is carried on upon the sabbath-
day : nor because Sunday trains are not arrested by
the legislature : nor because a public permission is
given to the working-classes for a few hours' recreation
on the day of rest : — but because we are selfish men ;
and because we prefer Pleasure to Duty, and Traffic to
Honour ; and because we love our party more than our
Church, and our Church more than our Christianity ;
and our Christianity more than Truth, and ourselves
more than all. These are the things that defile a
nation ; but the labour and the recreation of its Poor,
these are not the things that defile a nation.

Sermons : Second Series



754



BENJAMIN JOWETT

1817-1893

436 belief in Immortality

CONSIDERING the 'feebleness of the human
faculties and the uncertainty of the subject we
are inclined to believe that the fewer our words the
better. At the approach of death there is not much
said ; good men are too honest to go out of the world
professing more than they know. There is perhaps
no important subject about which, at any time, even
religious people speak so little to one another. In the
fulness of life the thought of death is mostly awakened
by the sight or recollection of the death of others
rather than by the prospect of our own. We must also
acknowledge that there are degrees of the belief in
immortality, and many forms in which it presents
itself to the mind. Some persons will say no more
than that they trust in God, and that they leave all
to Him. It is a great part of true religion not to
pretend to know more than we do. Others when they
quit this world are comforted with the hope ' That
they will see and know their friends in heaven '. But
it is better to leave them in the hands of God and to
be assured that ' no evil shall touch them '. There are
others again to whom the belief in a divine personality
has ceased to have any longer a meaning ; yet they
are satisfied that the end of all is not here, but that
something still remains to us, ' and some better thing
for the good than for the evil '. They are persuaded,
in spite of their theological nihilism, that the ideas
of justice and truth and holiness and love are realities.
They cherish an enthusiastic devotion to the first

755



BENJAMIN JOWETT



principles of morality. Through these they see, or
seem to see, darkly, and in a figure, that the soul is
immortal.

Introduction to the Phaedo

437 Socrates under Sentence of Death hears

the Voice of the Laws oj Athens

HAS a philosopher like you failed to discover that
our country is more to be valued and higher and
holier far than mother or father or any ancestor, and
more to be regarded in the eyes of the gods and of
men of understanding ? also to be soothed, and gently
and reverently entreated when angry, even more than
a father, and either to be persuaded, or if not persuaded,
to be obeyed ? And when we are punished by her,
whether with imprisonment or stripes, the punishment
is to be endured in silence ; and if she lead us to
wounds or death in battle, thither we follow as is
right ; neither may any one yield or retreat or leave
his rank, but whether in battle or in a court of law,
or in any other place, he must do what his city and his
country order him ; or he must change their view of
what is just : and if he may do no violence to his
father or mother, much less may he do violence to
his country.

Translation of the Crito

438 'The Death oj Socrates

NOW the hour of sunset was near, for a good deal
of time had passed while he was within. When
he came out, he sat down with us again after his bath,
but not much was said. Soon the jailer, who was the

75 6



BENJAMIN JOWETT

servant of the Eleven, entered and stood by him,
saying : — To you, Socrates, whom I know to be the
noblest and gentlest and best of all who ever came
to this place, I will not impute the angry feelings of
other men, who rage and swear at me, when, in
obedience to the authorities, I bid them drink the
poison — indeed, I am sure that you will not be angry
with me ; for others, as you are aware, and not I, are
to blame. And so fare you well, and try to bear
lightly what must needs be — you know my errand.
Then bursting into tears he turned away and went out.

Socrates looked at him and said : I return your good
wishes, and will do as you bid. Then turning to us,
he said, How charming the man is : since I have been
in prison he has always been coming to see me, and at
times he would talk to me, and was as good to me as
could be, and now see how generously he sorrows
on my account. We must do as he says, Cnto ; and
therefore let the cup be brought, if the poison is
prepared : if not, let the attendant prepare some.

Yet, said Cnto, the sun is still upon the hill tops,
and I know that many a one has taken the draught
late, and after the announcement has been made to
him, he has eaten and drunk, and enjoyed the society
of his beloved ; do not hurry — there is time enough.

Socrates said : Yes, Crito, and they of whom you
speak are right in so acting, for they think that they
will be gainers by the delay ; but I am right in not
following their example, for I do not think that I
should gain anything by drinking the poison a little
later ; I should only be ridiculous in my own eyes
for sparing and saving a life which is already forfeit.
Please then to do as I say, and not to refuse me.

Crito made a sign to the servant, who was standing

757



BENJAMIN JOWETT

by ; and he went out, and having been absent for
some time, returned with the jailer carrying the cup
of poison. Socrates said : You, my good friend, who
are experienced in these matters, shall give me direc-
tions how I am to proceed. The man answered :
You have only to walk about until your legs are heavy,
and then to lie down, and the poison will act. At
the same time he handed the cup to Socrates, who in
the easiest and gentlest manner, without the least
fear or change of colour or feature, looking at the man
with all his eyes, Echecrates, as his manner was, took
the cup and said : What do you say about making
a libation out of this cup to any god ? May I, or not f
The man answered : We only prepare, Socrates, just
so much as we deem enough. I understand, he said :
but I may and must ask the gods to prosper my
journey from this to the other world — even so — and
so be it according to my prayer. Then raising the cup
to his lips, quite readily and cheerfully he drank off
the poison. And hitherto most of us had been able
to control our sorrow ; but now when we saw him
drinking, and saw too that he had finished the draught,
we could no longer forbear, and in spite of myself
my own tears were flowing fast ; so that I covered
my face and wept, not for him, but at the thought
of my own calamity in having to part from such a
friend. Nor was I the first ; for Crito, when he found
himself unable to restrain his tears, had got up, and
I followed ; and at that moment, Apollodorus, who
had been weeping all the time, broke out in a loud
and passionate cry which made cowards of us all.
Socrates alone retained his calmness : What is this
strange outcry? he said. I sent away the women
mainly in order that they might not misbehave in
758



BENJAMIN JOWETT

this way, for I have been told that a man should die
in peace. Be quiet then, and have patience. When
we heard his words we were ashamed, and refrained
our tears ; and he walked about until, as he said, his
legs began to fail, and then he lay on his back, according
to the directions, and the man who gave him the
poison now and then looked at his feet and legs ; and
after a while he pressed his foot hard, and asked him
if he could feel ; and he said, No ; and then his leg,
and so upwards and upwards, and showed us that he
was cold and stiff. And he felt them himself, and
said : When the poison reaches the heart, that will
be the end. He was beginning to grow cold about the
groin, when he uncovered his face, for he had covered
himself up, and said — they were his last words — he
said : Cnto, I owe a cock to Asclepius ; will you
remember to pay the debt ? The debtshall bepaid,said
Crito ; is there anything else ? There was no answer
to this question ; but in a minute or two a movement
was heard, and the attendants uncovered him ; his
eyes were set, and Crito closed his eyes and mouth.

Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend ; con-
cerning whom I may truly say, that of all the men of
his time whom I have known, he was the wisest and
justest and best.

Translation of the Phaedo

43g Last Words on T'lato

AND so having brought into the world ' noble
£\. children ', he rests from the labours of author-
ship. More than two thousand two hundred years
have passed away since he returned to the place
of Apollo and the Muses. Yet the echo of his words

759



BENJAMIN JOWETT

continues to be heard among men, because of all
philosophers he has the most melodious voice. He is
the inspired prophet or teacher who can never die,
the only one in whom the outward form adequately
represents the fair soul within ; in whom the
thoughts of all who went before him are reflected
and of all who come after him are partly anticipated.
Other teachers of philosophy are dried up and withered,
— after a few centuries they have become dust ; but
he is fresh and blooming, and is always begetting new
ideas in the minds of men. They are one-sided and
abstract ; but he has many sides of wisdom. Nor is
he always consistent with himself, because he is
always moving onward, and knows that there are
many more things in philosophy than can be expressed
in words, and that truth is greater than consistency.
He who approaches him in the most reverent spirit
shall reap most of the fruit of his wisdom ; he who
reads him by the light of ancient commentators will
have the least understanding of him.

We may see him with the eye of the mind in the
groves of the Academy, or on the banks of the Ilissus,
or in the streets of Athens, alone or walking with
Socrates, full of those thoughts which have since
become the common possession of mankind. Or we
may compare him to a statue hid away in some temple
of Zeus or Apollo, no longer existing on earth, a statue
which has a look as of the God himself. Or we may
once more imagine him following in another state of
being the great company of heaven which he beheld
of old in a vision. So, ' partly trifling, but with
a certain degree of seriousness ', we linger around
the memory of a world which has passed away.

Introduction to the Laws of Plato

760



HENRY DAVID THOREAU

1817-1862

440 The Lure of the %iver

THE Mississippi, the Ganges, and the Nile, those
journeying atoms from the Rocky Mountains, the
Himmaleh, and Mountains of the Moon, have a kind
of personal importance in the annals of the world.
The heavens are not yet drained over their sources,
but the Mountains of the Moon still send their annual
tribute to the Pasha without fail, as they did to the
Pharaohs, though he must collect the rest of his
revenue at the point of the sword. Rivers must have
been the guides which conducted the footsteps of the
first travellers. They are the constant lure, when they
flow by our doors, to distant enterprise and adventure ;
and, by a natural impulse, the dwellers on the banks
will at length accompany their currents to the lowlands
of the globe, or explore at their invitation the interior
of continents. They are the natural highways of all
nations, not only levelling the ground and removing
obstacles from the path of the traveller, quenching
his thirst and bearing him on their bosoms, but
conducting him through the most interesting scenery,
the most populous portions of the globe, and where
the animal and vegetable kingdoms attain their
greatest perfection.

I had often stood on the banks of the Concord,
watching the lapse of the current, an emblem of all
progress, following the same law with the system,
with time, and all that is made ; the weeds at the
bottom gently bending down the stream, shaken by the
watery wind, still planted where their seeds had sunk,
but erelong to die and go down likewise ; the shining
pebbles, not yet anxious to better their condition, the

761



HENRY DAVID THOREAU



chips and weeds, and occasional logs and stems of
trees that floated past, fulfilling their fate, were objects
of singular interest to me, and at last I resolved to
launch myself on its bosom and float whither it would
bear me.

Week on the Concord

441 The Shipwreck

A BOUT a mile south we could see, rising above the
JLX. rocks, the masts of the British brig which the
St. John had endeavoured to follow, which had slipped
her cables, and, by good luck, run into the mouth of
Cohasset Harbour. A little further along the shore
we saw a man's clothes on a rock ; further, a woman's
scarf, a gown, a straw bonnet, the brig's caboose, and
one of her masts high and dry, broken into several
pieces. In another rocky cove, several rods from the
water, and behind rocks twenty feet high, lay a part
of one side of the vessel, still hanging together. It
was, perhaps, forty feet long, by fourteen wide. I
was even more surprised at the power of the waves,
exhibited on this shattered fragment, than I had
been at the sight of the smaller fragments before.
The largest timbers and iron braces were broken
superfluously, and I saw that no material could with-
stand the power of the waves ; that iron must go to
pieces in such a case, and an iron vessel would be
cracked up like an egg-shell on the rocks. Some of
these timbers, however, were so rotten that I could
almost thrust my umbrella through them. They told
us that some were saved on this piece, and also showed
where the sea had heaved it into this cove, which was
now dry. When I saw where it had come in, and in
762



HENRY DAVID THOREAU

what condition, I wondered that any had been saved
on it. A little further on a crowd of men was collected
around the mate of the St. John, who was telling his
story. He was a slim-looking youth, who spoke of
the captain as the master, and seemed a little excited.
He was saying that when they jumped into the boat,
she filled, and, the vessel lurching, the weight of the
water in the boat caused the painter to break, and so
they were separated. Whereat one man came away,
saying —

' Well, I don't see but he tells a straight story
enough. You see, the weight of the water in the boat
broke the painter. A boat full of water is very heavy,'
— and so on, in a loud and impertinently earnest tone,
as if he had a bet depending on it, but had no humane
interest in the matter.

Another, a large man, stood near by upon a rock,
gazing into the sea, and chewing large quids of tobacco,
as if that habit were forever confirmed with him.

' Come,' says another to his companion, ' let 's be
off. We've seen the whole of it. It 's no use to stay
to the funeral.'

Further, we saw one standing upon a rock, who, we
were told, was one that was saved. He was a sober-
looking man, dressed in a jacket and gray pantaloons,
with his hands in the pockets. I asked him a few
questions, which he answered ; but he seemed un-
willing to talk about it, and soon walked away. By
his side stood one of the lifeboat men, in an oil-cloth
jacket, who told us how they went to the relief of the
British brig, thinking that the boat of the St. John,
which they passed on the way, held all her crew,—
for the waves prevented their seeing those who were
on the vessel, though they might have saved some had

763



HENRY DAVID THOREAU



they known there were any there. A little further
was the flag of the St. John spread on a rock to dry,
and held down by stones at the corners. This frail,
but essential and significant portion of the vessel,
which had so long been the sport of the winds, was sure
to reach the shore. There were one or two houses
visible from these rocks, in which were some of the
survivors recovering from the shock which their bodies
and minds had sustained. One was not expected to live.

Cape Cod

442 Qhanticleer

ABOVE all, we cannot afford not to live in the
JLx. present. He is blessed over all mortals who loses
no moment of the passing life in remembering the
past. Unless our philosophy hears the cock crow in
every barn-yard within our horizon, it is belated.
That sound commonly reminds us that we are growing
rusty and antique in our employments and habits of
thought. His philosophy comes down to a more
recent time than ours. There is something suggested
by it that is a newer testament — the gospel according
to this moment. He has not fallen astern ; he has got
up early and kept up early, and to be where he is
is to be in season, in the foremost rank of time. It is
an expression of the health and soundness of nature,
a brag for all the world, — healthiness as of a spring
burst forth, a new fountain of the Muses, to celebrate
this last instant of time. Where he lives no fugitive
slave laws are passed. Who has not betrayed his
master many times since last he heard that note f

The merit of this bird's strain is in its freedom from
all plaintiveness. The singer can easily move us to
764



HENRY DAVID THOREAU



tears or to laughter, but where is he who can excite
in us a pure morning joy? When, in doleful dumps,
breaking the awful stillness of our wooden sidewalk
on a Sunday, or, perchance, a watcher in the house of
mourning, I hear a cockerel crow far or near, I think
to myself, ' There is one of us well, at any rate,' — and
with a sudden gush return to my senses.

Essays : Walking

443 aAutumn Sunset

THE sun sets on some retired meadow, where no
house is visible, with all the glory and splendour
that it lavishes on cities, and, perchance, as it has
never set before, — where there is but a solitary marsh-
hawk to have his wings gilded by it, or only a musquash
looks out from his cabin, and there is some little black-
veined brook in the midst of the marsh, just beginning
to meander, winding slowly round a decaying stump.
We walked in so pure and bright a light, gilding the
withered grass and leaves, so softly and serenely bright,
I thought I had never bathed in such a golden flood,
without a ripple or a murmur to it. The west side of
every wood and rising ground gleamed like a boundary
of Elysium, and the sun on our backs seemed like
a gentle herdsman driving us home at evening.

So we saunter toward the Holy Land, till one day
the sun shall shine more brightly than ever he has
done, shall perchance shine into our minds and hearts,
and light up our whole lives with a great awakening
light, as warm and serene and golden as on a bank-
side in autumn.

Essays • Walking



765



EMILY BRONTE

1818-1848

444 The Dream

THIS time, I remembered I was lying in the oak
closet, and I heard distinctly the gusty wind, and
the driving of the snow ; I heard, also, the fir-bough
repeat its teasing sound, and ascribed it to the right
cause : but it annoyed me so much, that I resolved
to silence it, if possible ; and, I thought, I rose and
endeavoured to unhasp the casement. The hook was
soldered into the staple : a circumstance observed
by me when awake, but forgotten. ' I must stop it,
nevertheless ! ' I muttered, knocking my knuckles
through the glass, and stretching an arm out to seize
the importunate branch ; instead of which, my
fingers closed on the fingers of a little, ice-cold hand !
The intense horror of nightmare came over me : I
tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung to
it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed, ' Let me in —
let me in ! ' ' Who are you ? ' I asked, struggling,
meanwhile, to disengage myself. ' Catherine Linton,'
it replied shiveringly (why did I think of Linton ?
I had read Earnshaw twenty times for Linton). ' I'm
come home : I'd lost my way on the moor ! ' As it
spoke, I discerned, obscurely, a child's face looking
through the window. Terror made me cruel ; and,
finding it useless to attempt shaking the creature off,
I pulled its wrist on to the broken pane, and rubbed
it to and fro till the blood ran down and soaked the
bedclothes : still it wailed, ' Let me in ! ' and main-
tained its tenacious gripe, almost maddening me with
fear. ' How can I ! ' I said at length. ' Let me go,
if you want me to let you in ! ' The fingers relaxed,
I snatched mine through the hole, hurriedly piled
766



EMILY BRONTE

the books up in a pyramid against it, and stopped my
ears to exclude the lamentable prayer. I seemed to
keep them closed above a quarter of an hour ; yet,
the instant I listened again, there was the doleful
cry moaning on ! ' Begone ! ' I shouted, ' I'll never
let you in, not if you beg for twenty years.' ' It is
twenty years,' mourned the voice : ' twenty years.
I've been a waif for twenty years ! ' Thereat began
a feeble scratching outside, and the pile of books
moved as if thrust forward. I tried to jump up ; but
could not stir a limb ; and so yelled aloud, in a frenzy
of fright. To my confusion, I discovered the yell was
not ideal : hasty footsteps approached my chamber
door ; somebody pushed it open, with a vigorous
hand, and a light glimmered through the squares at
the top of the bed. I sat shuddering yet, and wiping
the perspiration from my forehead : the intruder
appeared to hesitate, and muttered to himself. At
last, he said in a half-whisper, plainly not expecting
an answer, ' Is any one here ? ' I considered it best
to confess my presence ; for I knew Heathcliff's
accents, and feared he might search further, if I kept
quiet. With this intention, I turned and opened the
panels.

Wulhering Heighls

JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

1818-1894

445 T/ie End of the ^Middle <iAge

FOR, indeed, a change was coming upon the world,
the meaning and direction of which even still is
hidden from us, a change from era to era. The paths
trodden by the footsteps of ages were broken up ;

767



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

old things were passing away, and the faith and the
life of ten centuries were dissolving like a dream.
Chivalry was dying ; the abbey and the castle were
soon together to crumble into ruins ; and all the forms,
desires, beliefs, convictions of the old world were
passing away, never to return. A new continent had
risen up beyond the western sea. The floor of heaven,
inlaid with stars, had sunk back into an infinite abyss
of immeasurable space ; and the firm earth itself,
unfixed from its foundations, was seen to be but
a small atom in the awful vastness of the universe.
In the fabric of habit in which they had so laboriously
built for themselves, mankind were to remain no longer.

And now it is all gone — like an unsubstantial pageant
faded ; and between us and the old English there lies
a gulf of mystery which the prose of the historian
will never adequately bridge. They cannot come to
us, and our imagination can but feebly penetrate
to them. Only among the aisles of our cathedrals, only
as we gaze upon their silent figures sleeping on their
tombs, some faint conceptions float before us of what
these men were when they were alive ; and perhaps
in the sound of church bells, that peculiar creation of
mediaeval age, which falls upon the car like the echo
of a vanished world.

Iltsloiy of England

446 The Taking of the ' Qacajuego '

DRAKE began to realise that he was now entirely
alone, and had only himself and his own crew to
depend on. There was nothing to do but to go through
with it, danger adding to the interest. Arica was the
next point visited. Half a hundred blocks of silver
768



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

were picked up at Arica. After Arica came Lima, the
chief depot of all, where the grandest haul was looked
for. At Lima, alas ! they were just too late. Twelve
great hulks lay anchored there. The sails were unbent,
the men were ashore. They contained nothing but
some chests of reals and a few bales of silk and linen.
But a thirteenth, called by the gods Our Lady of the
Conception, called by men Cacafuego, a name incapable
of translation, had sailed a few days before for the
isthmus, with the whole produce of the Lima mines
for the season. Her ballast was silver, her cargo gold
and emeralds and rubies. Drake deliberately cut the
cables of the ships in the roads, that they might drive
ashore and be unable to follow him. The Pelican
spread her wings, every feather of them, and sped
away in pursuit. He would know the Cacafuego, so
he learnt at Lima, by the peculiar cut of her sails.
The first man who caught sight of her was promised
a gold chain for his reward. A sail was seen on the
second day. It was not the chase, but it was worth
stopping for. Eighty pounds' worth of gold was found,
and a great gold crucifix, set with emeralds said to be
as large as pigeons' eggs. They took the kernel. They
left the shell. Still on and on. We learn from the
Spanish accounts that the Viceroy of Lima, as soon as
he recovered from his astonishment, despatched ships
in pursuit. They came up with the last plundered
vessel, heard terrible tales of the rovers' strength, and
went back for a larger force. The Pelican meanwhile
went along upon her course for 800 miles. At length,
when in the latitude of Quito and close under the shore,
the Cacafuego's peculiar sails were sighted, and the
gold chain was claimed. There she was, freighted
with the fruit of Aladdin's garden, going lazily along
2830 c c 769



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

a few miles ahead. Care was needed in approaching
her. If she guessed the Pelican's character, she would
run in upon the land and they would lose her. It
was afternoon. The sun was still above the horizon,
and Drake meant to wait till night, when the breeze
would he off the shore, as in the tropics it always is.

The Pelican sailed two feet to the Cacafuego's one.
Drake filled his empty wine-skins with water and trailed
them astern to stop his way. The chase supposed that
she was followed by some heavy-loaded trader, and,
wishing for company on a lonely voyage, she slackened
sail and waited for him to come up. At length the
sun went down into the ocean, the rosy light faded
from off the snows of the Andes ; and when both
ships had become invisible from the shore, the skins
were hauled in, the night wind rose, and the water
began to ripple under the Pelican's bows. The
Cacafuego was swiftly overtaken, and when within
a cable's length a voice hailed her to put her head
into the wind. The Spanish commander, not under-
standing so strange an order, held on his course. A
broadside brought down his mainyard, and a flight
of arrows rattled on his deck. He was himself wounded.
In a few minutes he was a prisoner, and Our Lady of the
Conception and her precious freight were in the
corsair's power. The wreck was cut away ; the ship
was cleared ; a prize crew was put on board. Both
vessels turned their heads to the sea. At daybreak no
land was to be seen, and the examination of the prize
began. The full value was never acknowledged. The
invoice, if there was one, was destroyed. The accurate
figures were known only to Drake and Queen Eliza-
beth. A published schedule acknowledged to twenty
tons of silver bullion, thirteen chests of silver coins, and
770



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

a hundredweight of gold, but there were gold nuggets
besides in indefinite quantity, and ' a great store 5 of
pearls, emeralds, and diamonds. The Spanish Govern-
ment proved a loss of a million and a half of ducats,
excluding what belonged to private persons. The total
capture was immeasurably greater.

Drake, we are told, was greatly satisfied. He thought
it prudent to stay in the neighbourhood no longer than
necessary. He went north with all sail set, taking his
prize along with him. The master, San Juan de
Anton, was removed on board the Pelican to have his
wound attended to. He remained as Drake's guest
for a week, and sent in a report of what he observed
to the Spanish Government. One at least of Drake's
party spoke excellent Spanish. This person took San
Juan over the ship. She showed signs, San Juan said,
of rough service, but was still in fine condition, with
ample arms, spare rope, mattocks, carpenter's tools
of all descriptions. There were eighty-five men on
board all told, fifty of them men-of-war, the rest
young fellows, ship-boys and the like. Drake himself
was treated with great reverence ; a sentinel stood
always at his cabin door. He dined alone with music.

English Seamen in ike Sixteenth Century

44j Oxford lavished

MANY long years had passed since I visited
Oxford, — some twenty-eight or more. I had
friends among the resident members of that venerable
domicile of learning. Pleasant had been the time that
I had spent there, of which intervening years had not
diminished the remembrance — perhaps heightened the
tone of its colouring. On many accounts I regarded

771



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

that beautiful city with affectionate veneration. There
were more than local attractions to render it interest-
ing. There were the recollections of those who ceased
in the interval to be denizens of this world. These
could not but breathe sadness over the noble edifices
that recalled men, conversations, and convivialities
which, however long departed, shadowed upon the
mind its own inevitable destiny. Again were those
venerable buildings before me in their architectural
richness. There were tower, and roof, and gateway,
in all their variety of outline, denned with the sharp
light and shade peculiar to ecclesiastical architecture.
There were tufted groves overshadowing the haunts
of learning ; and there, too, was old Magdalen, which
used to greet our sight so pleasantly upon our approach
to the city. I began to fancy I had leaped no gulf of
time since, for the Cherwell ran on as of old. I felt
that the happy allusion of Quevedo to the Tiber was
not out of place here, ' The fugitive is alone per-
manent.' The same river ran on as it had run on
before, but the cheerful faces that had been once
reflected in its stream had passed away. I saw things
once familiar as I saw them before ; but ' the fathers,
where were they f ' I was in this respect like one
awaked from the slumber of an age, who found himself
a stranger in his own land. . .

At length I adjourned to the Star, somewhat moody,
more than half wishing I had not entered the city. I
ordered my solitary meal, and began ruminating, as
we all do, over the thousandth-time told tale of human
destiny by generation after generation. I am not sure
I did not greet with sullen pleasure a heavy, dark,
dense mass of cloud that at that moment canopied
the city. The mind finds all kinds of congenialities
772



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

grateful at such moments. Some drops of rain fell ;
then a shower, tolerably heavy. I could not go out
again as I intended doing. I sat and sipped my wine,
thinking of the fate of cities, — of Nineveh the re-
nowned, of the marbles lately recovered from thence
with the mysterious arrow-headed characters. I
thought that some future Layard might exhume the
cornices of the Oxford temples. The deaths of cities
were as inevitable as those of men. I felt that my
missing friends had only a priority in mortality, and
that the law of the Supreme existed to be obeyed
without man's questionings.

But a sun-burst took place, the shower ceased, all
became fresh and clear. I saw several gownsmen pass
down the street, and I sallied forth again. Several
who were in front of me, so full was I of old imaginings,
I thought might be old friends whom I should recog-
nize. How idle ! I strolled to the Isis. It was all
glitter and gaiety. The sun shone out warmly and
covered the surface of the river with gold. Numerous
skiffs of the university-men were alive on the water,
realizing the lines,- —

' Some lightly o'er the current swim,
Some show their gaily gilded trim
Quick glancing to the sun.'

Here was the repetition of an old performance, but
the actors were new. I too had once floated over that
glittering water, or lain up by the bank in conversation,
or reciting verses, or, perhaps, in that silent, dreamy
vacancy, in which the mind ruminates or rests folded up
within itself in the consciousness of its own immortality.

There seems of late years much less of that feeling
for poetry than once existed ; the same may be
observed in respect to classical learning. Few now

773



JAMES ANTHONY FROUDE

regard how perished nations lived and passed away,—
how men thought, acted, and were moved, for
example, in the time of Pericles or the Roman
Augustus. What are they to us ? What is blind
Maeonides to us, or that Roman who wrote odes so
beautifully — who understood so well the philosophy
of life and the poetry of life at the spring of Bandusia ?
In the past generation, a part of the adolescent being
and of manhood extended a kindly feeling towards
them. We hear no admiration of those immortal
strains now. We must turn for them to our univer-
sities. People are getting shy of them, as rich men
shirk poor friends. Are we in the declining state, that
of ' mechanical arts and merchandize,' to use Lord
Bacon's phrase, and is our middle age of learning past ?
Even then, thank Heaven, we have our universities
still, where we may, for a time at least, enter and
converse with the spirits of the good, that ' sit in the
clouds and mock ' the rest of the greedy world. They
will last our time — glorious mementos of the anxiety
of our forefathers for the preservation of learning ;
hallowed by grateful recollections, by time, renown,
virtue, conquests over ignorance, imperishable grati-
tude, a proud roll of mighty names in their sons, and
the prospect of continuing to be monuments of glory
to unborn generations. Long may Oxford and
Cambridge stand and brighten with years, though to
some they may not, as they do to me, exhibit a title
to the gratitude and admiration of Old England, to
which it would be difficult to point out worthy rivals.

Words about Oxford



774



GEORGE ELIOT
(MARY ANN EVANS)

1819-1880

448 <?Maggie and the Doll

' A/f AGGIE > Ma §? ie >' exclaimed Mrs. Tulliver,
_LVJL sitting stout and helpless with the brushes
on her lap, ' what is to become of you, if you're so
naughty? I'll tell your aunt Glegg and your aunt
Pullet when they come next week, and they'll never
love you any more. O dear, O dear ! look at your
clean pinafore, wet from top to bottom. Folks 'ull
think it 's a judgment on me as I've got such a child —
they'll think I've done summat wicked.'

Before this remonstrance was finished, Maggie was
already out of hearing, making her way towards the
great attic that ran under the old high-pitched roof,
shaking the water from her black locks as she ran, like
a Skye terrier escaped from his bath. This attic was
Maggie's favourite retreat on a wet day, when the
weather was not too cold ; here she fretted out all her
ill-humours, and talked aloud to the worm-eaten floors
and the worm-eaten shelves, and the dark rafters
festooned with cobwebs ; and here she kept a Fetish
which she punished for all her misfortunes. This was
the trunk of a large wooden doll, which once stared
with the roundest of eyes above the reddest of cheeks ;
but was now entirely defaced by a long career of
vicarious suffering. Three nails driven into the head
commemorated as many crises in Maggie's nine years
of earthly struggle ; that luxury of vengeance having
been suggested to her by the picture of Jael destroying
Sisera in the old Bible. The last nail had been driven
in with a fiercer stroke than usual, for the Fetish on

775



GEORGE ELIOT



that occasion represented aunt Glegg. But immediately
afterwards Maggie had reflected that if she drove many
nails in, she would not be so well able to fancy that the
head was hurt when she knocked it against the wall,
nor to comfort it, and make believe to poultice it, when
her fury was abated ; for even aunt Glegg would be
pitiable when she had been hurt very much, and
thoroughly humiliated, so as to beg her niece's pardon.
Since then she had driven no more nails in, but had
soothed herself by alternately grinding and beating the
wooden head against the rough brick of the great
chimneys that made two square pillars supporting the
roof. That was what she did this morning on reaching
the attic, sobbing all the while with a passion that
expelled every other form of consciousness — even the
memory of the grievance that had caused it. As at
last the sobs were getting quieter, and the grinding less
fierce, a sudden beam of sunshine, falling through the
wire lattice across the worm-eaten shelves, made her
throw away the Fetish and run to the window. The
sun was really breaking out ; the sound of the mill
seemed cheerful again ; the granary doors were open ;
and there was Yap, the queer white-and-brown terrier
with one ear turned back trotting about and sniffing
vaguely, as if he were in search of a companion. It
was irresistible. Maggie tossed her hair back and ran
down-stairs, seized her bonnet without putting it on,
peeped, and then dashed along the passage lest she
should encounter her mother, and was quickly out in
the yard, whirling round like a Pythoness, and singing
as she whirled, ' Yap, Yap, Tom 's coming home ! '
while Yap danced and barked round her, as much as
to say, if there was any noise wanted he was the dog
for it. The Mill on the Floss

776



GEORGE ELIOT



449 £Mrs, Linnefs fading

MRS. LINNET had become a reader of religious
books since Mr. Tryan's advent, and as she was
in the habit of confining her perusal to the purely
secular portions, which bore a very small proportion to
the whole, she could make rapid progress through
a large number of volumes. On taking up the bio-
graphy of a celebrated preacher, she immediately
turned to the end to see what disease he died of ; and
if his legs swelled, as her own occasionally did, she felt
a stronger interest in ascertaining any earlier facts in
the history of the dropsical divine — whether he had
ever fallen off a stage coach, whether he had married
more than one wife, and, in general, any adventures
or repartees recorded of him previous to the epoch of
his conversion. She then glanced over the letters and
diary, and wherever there was a predominance of
Zion, the River of Life, and notes of exclamation, she
turned over to the next page ; but any passage in
which she saw such promising nouns as ' smallpox,'
' pony,' or ' boots and shoes,' at once arrested her.

Scenes of Clerical Life

450 The Archery ^Meeting

BRACKENSHAW PARK, where the Archery
Meeting was held, looked out from its gentle
heights far over the neighbouring valley to the out-
lying eastern downs and the broad slow rise of culti-
vated country hanging like a vast curtain towards the
west. The castle, which stood on the highest platform
of the clustered hills, was built of rough-hewn lime-
stone, full of lights and shadows made by the dark

777



GEORGE ELIOT



dust of lichens and the washings of the rain. Masses of
beech and fir sheltered it on the north, and spread
down here and there along the green slopes like flocks
seeking the water which gleamed below. The archery-
ground was a carefully-kept enclosure on a bit of table-
land at the farthest end of the park, protected towards
the south-west by tall elms and a thick screen of
hollies, which kept the gravel walk and the bit of newly-
mown turf where the targets were placed in agreeable
afternoon shade. The Archery Hall with an arcade
in front showed like a white temple against the greenery
on the northern side.

What could make a better background for the
flower-groups of ladies, moving and bowing and turning
their necks as it would become the leisurely lilies to
do if they took to locomotion ? The sounds too were
very pleasant to hear, even when the military band
from Wancester ceased to play : musical laughs in all
the registers and a harmony of happy friendly speeches,
now rising towards mild excitement, now sinking to
an agreeable murmur. . .

Who can deny that bows and arrows are among the
prettiest weapons in the world for feminine forms to
play with ? They prompt attitudes full of grace and
power, where that fine concentration of energy seen
in all markmanship, is freed from associations of
bloodshed. . . Archery has no ugly smell of brimstone ;
breaks nobody's shins, breeds no athletic monsters ;
its only danger is that of failing, which for generous
blood is enough to mould skilful action. And among
the Brackenshaw archers the prizes were all of the
nobler symbolic kind : not property to be carried off
in a parcel, degrading honour into gain ; but the gold
arrow and the silver, the gold star and the silver.,
778



GEORGE ELIOT



to be worn for a time in sign of achievement and then
transferred to the next who did excellently. These
signs of pre-eminence had the virtue of wreaths
without their inconveniences, which might have
produced a melancholy effect in the heat of the ball-
room. Altogether the Brackenshaw Archery Club
was an institution framed with good taste, so as not
to have by necessity any ridiculous incidents.

And to-day all incalculable elements were in its
favour. There was mild warmth, and no wind to
disturb either hair or drapery or the course of the
arrow ; all skilful preparation had fair play, and when
there was a general march to extract the arrows, the
promenade of joyous young creatures in light speech
and laughter, the graceful movement in common
towards a common object, was a show worth looking
at. Here Gwendolen seemed a Calypso among her
nymphs. It was in her attitudes and movements
that every one was obliged to admit her surpassing
charm.

Darnel Deronda

CHARLES KINGSLEY

1819-1875

451 lAmyas on the Q/if

SO on they went to the point, where the cyclopean
wall of granite cliff which forms the western side
of Lundy, ends sheer in a precipice of some three
hundred feet, topped by a pile of snow-white rock,
bespangled with golden lichens. As they approached,
a raven, who sat upon the topmost stone, black against
the bright blue sky, flapped lazily away, and sank down
the abysses of the cliff, as if he scented the corpses

779



CHARLES KINGSLEY



underneath the surge. Below them from the Gull-
rock rose a thousand birds, and filled the air with
sound ; the choughs cackled, the hacklets wailed, the
great blackbacks laughed querulous defiance at the
intruders, and a single falcon, with an angry bark,
dashed out from beneath their feet, and hung poised
high aloft, watching the sea-fowl which swung slowly
round and round below.

It was a glorious sight, upon a glorious day. To the
northward the glens rushed down toward the cliff,
crowned with grey crags, and carpeted with purple
heather and green fern ; and from their feet stretched
away to the westward the sapphire rollers of the vast
Atlantic, crowned with a thousand crests of flying
foam. On their left hand, some ten miles to the
south, stood out against the sky the purple wall of
Hartland cliffs, sinking lower and lower as they
trended away to the southward along the lonely iron-
bound shores of Cornwall, until they faded, dim and
blue, into the blue horizon forty miles away.

The sky was flecked with clouds, which rushed
toward them fast upon the roaring south-west wind ;
and the warm ocean breeze swept up the cliffs, and
whistled through the heather-bells, and howled in
cranny and in crag,

Till the pillars and clefts of the granite
Rang like a God-swept lyre ;

while Amyas, a proud smile upon his lips, stood breast-
ing that genial stream of airy wine with swelling
nostrils and fast-heaving chest, and seemed to drink
in life from every gust. All three were silent for
awhile ; and Jack and Cary, gazing downward with
delight upon the glory and the grandeur of the sight,
forgot for awhile that their companion saw it not. Yet
780



CHARLES KINGSLEY



when they started sadly, and looked into his face,
did he not see itf So wide and eager were his eyes,
so bright and calm his face, that they fancied for an
instant that he was once more even as they.

A deep sigh undeceived them. ' I know it is all
here — the dear old sea, where I would live and die.
And my eyes feel for it ; feel for it — and cannot find
it ; never, never will find it again for ever ! God's
will be done ! '

' Do you say that ? ' asked Brimblecombe, eagerly.

' Why should I not ? Why have I been raving in
hell-fire for I know not how many days, but to find
out that, John Brimblecombe, thou better man than If'

' Not that last : but Amen ! Amen ! and the Lord
has indeed had mercy upon thee ! ' said Jack, through
his honest tears.'

' Amen ! ' said Amyas. ' Now set me where I can
rest among the rocks without fear of falling — for life
is sweet still, even without eyes, friends — and leave
me to myself awhile.'

It was no easy matter to find a safe place ; for from
the foot of the crag the heathety turf slopes down all
but upright, on one side to a cliff which overhangs
a shoreless cove of deep dark sea, and on the other to
an abyss even more hideous, where the solid rock has
sunk away, and opened inland in the hillside a smooth-
walled pit, some sixty feet square and some hundred
and fifty in depth, aptly known then as now, as the
Devil's-limekiln ; the mouth of which, as old wives
say, was once closed by the Shutter-rock itself, till
the fiend in malice hurled it into the sea, to be a pest
to mariners. A narrow and untrodden cavern at the
bottom connects it with the outer sea ; they could
even then hear the mysterious thunder and gurgle

78;



CHARLES KINGSLEY



of the surge in the subterranean adit, as it rolled huge
boulders to and fro in darkness, and forced before it
gusts of pent-up air. It was a spot to curdle weak
blood, and to make weak heads reel : but all the fitter
on that account for Amyas and his fancy.

' You can sit here as in an arm-chair,' said Cary,
helping him down to one of those square natural seats
so common in the granite tors.

' Good ; now turn my face to the Shutter. Be
sure and exact. So. Do I face it full i '

' Full,' said Cary.

' Then I need no eyes wherewith to see what is
before me,' said he with a sad smile. ' I know every
stone and every headland, and every wave too, I may
say, far beyond aught that eye can reach. Now go,
and leave me alone with God and with the dead ! '

They retired a little space and watched him. He
never stirred for many minutes ; then leaned his
elbows on his knees, and his head upon his hands,
and so was still again. He remained so long thus,
that the pair became anxious, and went towards him.
He was asleep, and breathing quick and heavily.

' He will take a fever,' said Brimblecombe, ' if he
sleeps much longer with his head down in the sunshine.'

' We must wake him gently, if we wake him at all.'
And Cary moved forward to him.

As he did so, Amyas lifted his head, and turning it
to right and left, felt round him with his sightless eyes.

' You have been asleep, Amyas.'

' Have I ? I have not slept back my eyes, then.
Take up this great useless carcase of mine, and lead
me home. I shall buy me a dog when I get to Burrough,
I think, and make him tow me in a string, eh ? So !
Give me your hand. Now, march 1 '
782



CHARLES KINGSLEY

His guides heard with surprise this new cheerfulness.

' Thank God, Sir, that your heart is so light already,'
said good Jack ; ' it makes me feel quite upraised
myself, like.'

' I have reason to be cheerful, Sir John ; I have left
a heavy load behind me. I have been wilful, and proud,
and a blasphemer, and swollen with cruelty and pride ;
and God has brought me low for it, and cut me off
from my evil delight. No more Spaniard-hunting
for me now, my masters. God will send no such
fools as I upon His errands.'

' You do not repent of fighting the Spaniards f '

' Not I : but of hating even the worst of them.
Listen to me, Will and Jack. If that man wronged me,
I wronged him likewise. I have been a fiend when
I thought myself the grandest of men, yea, a very
avenging angel out of heaven. But God has shown
me my sin, and we have made up our quarrel for ever.'

' Made it up f '

' Made it up, thank God. But I am weary. Set
me down awhile, and I will tell you how it befel.'

Wondering, they set him down upon the heather,
while the bees hummed round them in the sun ;
and Amyas felt for a hand of each, and clasped it in
his own hand, and began —

' When you left me there upon the rock, lads, I
looked away and out to sea, to get one last snuff of
the merry sea-breeze, which will never sail me again.
And as I looked, I tell you truth, I could see the water
and the sky ; as plain as ever I saw them, till I thought
my sight was come again. But soon I knew it was not
so ; for I saw more than man could see ; right over
the ocean, as I live, and away to the Spanish Main.

26 The frost is from Ms point deliberately metrical.

783



CHARLES KINGSLEY



And I saw Barbados, and Grenada, and all the isles
that we ever sailed by ; and La Guayra in Caraccas,
and the Silla, and the house beneath it where she lived.
And I saw him walking with her, on the barbecue,
and he loved her then. I saw what I saw ; and he
loved her ; and I say he loves her still.

' Then I saw the cliffs beneath me, and the Gull-
rock, and the Shutter, and the Ledge ; I saw them,
William Cary, and the weeds beneath the merry blue
sea. And I saw the grand old galleon, Will ; she has
righted with the sweeping of the tide. She lies in
fifteen fathoms, at the edge of the rocks, upon the
sand ; and her men are all lying around her, asleep
until the Judgement Day.'

Cary and Jack looked at him, and then at each other.
His eyes were clear, and bright, and full of meaning ;
and yet they knew that he was blind. His voice was
shaping itself into a song. Was he inspired f Insane ?
What was it ? And they listened with awe-struck
faces, as the giant pointed down into the blue depths
far below, and went on.

' And I saw him sitting in his cabin, like a valiant
gentleman of Spain ; and his officers were sitting
round him, with their swords upon the table, at the
wine. And the prawns and the crayfish and the
rockling, they swam in and out above their heads :
but Don Guzman he never heeded, but sat still, and
drank his wine. Then he took a locket from his bosom ;
and I heard him speak, Will, and he said : " Here 's
the picture of my fair and true lady ; drink to her,
Senors all." Then he spoke to me, Will, and called
me, right up through the oar-weed and the sea :
" We have had a fair quarrel, Senor ; it is time to be
friends once more. My wife and your brother have
784



CHARLES KINGSLEY



forgiven me ; so your honour takes no stain." And
I answered, " We are friends, Don Guzman ; God has
judged our quarrel, and not we." Then he said,
" I sinned, and I am punished." And I said, " And,
Senor, so am I." Then he held out his hand to me,
Cary ; and I stooped to take it, and awoke.'



ND when the daylight came, Tom found himself



And what sort of a river was it? Was it like an
Irish stream, winding through the brown bogs, where
the wild ducks squatter up from among the white
water-lilies, and the curlews flit to and fro, crying
' Tullie-wheep, mind your sheep ' ; and Dennis tells
you strange stories of the Peishtamore, the great
bogy-snake which lies in the black peat pools, among
the old pine-stems, and puts his head out at night to
snap at the cattle as they come down to drink ? . .

Or was it like a Welsh salmon river, which is remark-
able chiefly (at least, till this last year) for containing
no salmon, as they have been all poached out by the
enlightened peasantry, to prevent the Cythrawl Sas-
senach (which means you, my little dear, your kith
and kin, and signifies much the same as the Chinese
Fan Quei) from coming bothering into Wales, with
good tackle, and ready money, and civilisation, and
common honesty, and other like things of which the
Cymry stand in no need whatsoever ?

Or was it such a salmon stream as I trust you will see
among the Hampshire water-meadows before your
hairs are grey, under the wise new fishing-laws? —



Westward Ho t



452



Salmon l^ivers




CHARLES KINGSLEY

when Winchester apprentices shall covenant, as they
did three hundred years ago, not to be made to eat
salmon more than three days a week ; and fresh-run
fish shall be as plentiful under Salisbury spire as they
are in Holly-hole at Christchurch ; in the good time
coming, when folks shall see that, of all Heaven's
gifts of food, the one to be protected most carefully is
that worthy gentleman salmon, who is generous
enough to go down to the sea weighing five ounces,
and to come back next year weighing five pounds,
without having cost the soil or the state one farthing ?

Or was it like a Scotch stream, such as Arthur
Clough drew in his ' Bothie ' : —

Where over a ledge of granite
Into a granite bason the amber torrent descended. . .
Beautiful there for the colour derived from green rocks under ,
Beautiful most of all, where beads of foam uprising
Mingle tbetr clouds of white with the delicate hue of the stillness . .
Cliff over cliff for us sides, with rowan and pendent birch boughs. . .

Ah, my little man, when you are a big man, and fish
such a stream as that, you will hardly care, I think,
whether she be roaring down in full spate, like coffee
covered with scald cream, while the fish are swirling
at your fly as an oar-blade swirls in a boat-race, or
flashing up the cataract like silver arrows, out of the
fiercest of the foam ; or whether the fall be dwindled
to a single thread, and the shingle below be as white
and dusty as a turnpike road, while the salmon huddle
together in one dark cloud in the clear amber pool,
sleeping away their time till the rain creeps back again
off the sea. You will not care much, if you have eyes
and brains ; for you will lay down your rod contentedly,
and drink in at your eyes the beauty of that glorious
place ; and listen to the water-ouzel piping on the
786



CHARLES KINGSLEY



stones, and watch the yellow roes come down to drink
and look up at you with their great soft trustful eyes,
as much as to say, 4 You could not have the heart
to shoot at us f '. .

No. It was none of these, the salmon stream at
Harthover. It was such a stream as you see in dear
old Bewick.

The Water Babies

453 Finding a Fox

A SILENT, dim, distanceless, steaming, rotting
day in March. The last brown oak-leaf which
had stood out the winter's frost spun and quivered
plump down, and then lay ; as if ashamed to have
broken for a moment the ghastly stillness, like an
awkward guest at a great dumb dinner-party. A cold
suck of wind just proved its existence, by toothaches
on the north side of all faces. The spiders, having
been weather-bewitched the night before, had unanim-
ously agreed to cover every brake and brier with
gossamer-cradles, and never a fly to be caught in them ;
like Manchester cotton-spinners madly glutting the
markets in the teeth of ' no demand.' The steam
crawled out of the dank turf, and reeked off the flanks
and nostrils of the shivering horses, and clung with
clammy paws to frosted hats and dripping boughs.
A soulless, skyless, catarrhal day, as if that bustling
dowager, old mother Earth — what with match-
making in spring, and fetes champetres in summer, and
dinner-giving in autumn — was fairly worn out, and
put to bed with the influenza, under wet blankets
and the cold-water cure.
There sat Lancelot by the cover-side, his knees

787



CHARLES KINGSLEY



aching with cold and wet, thanking his stars that he
was not one of the whippers-in who were lashing
about in the dripping cover. . .

But ' all things do end,' and so did this ; and the
silence of the hounds also ; . . and Lancelot began to
stalk slowly with a dozen horsemen up the wood-ride,
to a fitful accompaniment of wandering hound -music,
where the choristers were as invisible as nightingales
among the thick cover. And hark ! . . the sweet hubbub
suddenly crashed out into one jubilant shriek, and then
swept away fainter and fainter among the trees. The
walk became a trot — the trot a canter. Then a faint
melancholy shout at a distance, answered by a ' Stole
away ! ' from the fields ; a doleful ' toot ! ' of the
horn ; the dull thunder of many horse-hoofs rolling
along the further wood-side. Then red coats, flashing
like sparks of fire across the grey gap of mist at the
nde's-mouth, then a whipper-in, bringing up a belated
hound, burst into the pathway, smashing and plunging,
with shut eyes, through ash-saplings and hassock-grass ;
then a fat farmer, sedulously pounding through the
mud, was overtaken and bespattered in spite of all his
struggles ; — until the line streamed out into the wide
rushy pasture, starting up pewits and curlews, as
horsemen poured in from every side, and cunning
old farmers rode off at inexplicable angles to some
well-known haunts of pug : and right ahead, chiming
and jangling sweet madness, the dappled pack glanced
and wavered through the veil of soft grey mist.

Yeast



788



JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

1819-1891

454 Evening Thoughts after War-Time

WALKING one day toward the Village, as we
used to call it in the good old days when almost
every dweller in the town had been born in it, I was
enjoying that delicious sense of disenthralment from
the actual which the deepening twilight brings with
it, giving, as it does, a sort of obscure novelty to things
familiar. . .

I love old ways, and the path I was walking felt
kindly to the feet it had known for almost fifty years.
How many fleeting impressions it had shared with
me ! How many times I had lingered to study the
shadows of the leaves mezzotinted upon the turf
that edged it by the moon, of the bare boughs etched
with a touch beyond Rembrandt by the same uncon-
scious artist on the smooth page of snow ! If I turned
round, through dusky tree-gaps came the first twinkle
of evening lamps in the dear old homestead. On
Corey's hill I could see these tiny pharoses of love
and home and sweet domestic thoughts flash out one
by one across the blackening salt-meadow between.
How much has not kerosene added to the cheerfulness
of our evening landscape ! A pair of night-herons
flapped heavily over me toward the hidden river. The
war was ended. I might walk townward without that
aching dread of bulletins that had darkened the July
sunshine, and twice made the scarlet leaves of October
seem stained with blood. I remembered with a pang,
half proud, half painful, how so many years ago I had
walked over the same path and felt round my finger
the soft pressure of a little hand that was one day to

789



JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

harden with faithful grip of sabre. On how many
paths, leading to how many homes where proud
Memory does all she can to fill up the fireside gaps
with shining shapes, must not men be walking in just
such pensive mood as I ? Ah, young heroes, safe in
immortal youth as those of Homer, you at least carried
your ideal hence untarnished ! It is locked for you
beyond moth or rust in the treasure-chamber of Death.

On a Certain Condescension in Foreigners



HERMAN MELVILLE

1819-1891

455 Fay away

WE had a very pleasant day ; my trusty valet
plied the paddle and swept us gently along the
margin of the water, beneath the shades of the over-
hanging thickets. Fayaway and I reclined in the stern
of the canoe, on the very best terms possible with one
another ; the gentle nymph occasionally placing her
pipe to her lip, and exhaling the mild fumes of the
tobacco, to which her rosy breath added a fresh
perfume. . .

We floated about thus for several hours, when
I looked up to the warm, glowing, tropical sky, and
then down into the transparent depths below ; and
when my eye, wandering from the bewitching scenery
around, fell upon the grotesquely-tattooed form of
Kory-Kory, and finally encountered the pensive gaze
of Fayaway, I thought I had been transported to some
fairy region, so unreal did everything appear.

This lovely piece of water was the coolest spot in
all the valley, and I now made it a place of continual
790



HERMAN MELVILLE



resort during the hottest period of the day. One side
of it lay near the termination of a long gradually
expanding gorge, which mounted to the heights that
environed the vale. The strong trade wind, met in
its course by these elevations, circled and eddied
about their summits, and was sometimes driven down
the steep ravine and swept across the valley, ruffling
in its passage the otherwise tranquil surface of the
lake.

One day, after we had been paddling about for some
time, I disembarked Kory-Kory, and paddled the
canoe to the windward side of the lake. As I turned
the canoe, Fayaway, who was with me, seemed all at
once to be struck with some happy idea. With a wild
exclamation of delight, she disengaged from her person
the ample robe of tappa which was knotted over her
shoulder (for the purpose of shielding her from the
sun), and spreading it out like a sail, stood erect with
upraised arms in the head of the canoe. We American
sailors pride ourselves upon our straight clean spars,
but a prettier little mast than Fayaway made was
never shipped a-board of any craft.

In a moment the tappa was distended by the
breeze — the long brown tresses of Fayaway streamed
in the air — and the canoe glided rapidly through the
water, and shot towards the shore. Seated in the
stern, I directed its course with my paddle until it
dashed up the soft sloping bank, and Fayaway, with a
light spring, alighted on the ground ; whilst Kory-
Kory, who had watched our manoeuvres with admira-
tion, now clapped his hands in transport, and shouted
like a madman. Many a time afterwards was this
feat repeated.

Typee
791



HERMAN MELVILLE



456 Sighting the Whale

IT was a cloudy, sultry afternoon ; the seamen
were lazily lounging about the decks, or vacantly
gazing over into the lead-colored waters. Quee-
queg and I were mildly employed weaving what is
called a sword-mat, for an additional lashing to our
boat. So still and subdued and yet somehow preluding
was all the scene, and such an incantation of revelry
lurked in the air, that each silent sailor seemed resolved
into his own invisible self.

I was the attendant or page of Queequeg, while
busy at the mat. As I kept passing and repassing
the filling or woof of marline between the long yarns
of the warp, using my own hand for the shuttle,
and as Queequeg, standing sideways, ever and anon
slid his heavy oaken sword between the threads, and
idly looking off upon the water, carelessly and un-
thinkingly drove home every yarn : I say so strange
a dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship
and all over the sea, only broken by the intermitting
dull sound of the sword, that it seemed as if this were
the Loom of Time, and I myself were a shuttle
mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates.
There lay the fixed threads of the warp subject to
but one single, ever returning, unchanging vibration,
and that vibration merely enough to admit of the
crosswise interblending of other threads with its own.
This warp seemed necessity ; and here, thought I,
with my own hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my
own destiny into these unalterable threads. Mean-
time, Queequeg's impulsive, indifferent sword, some-
times hitting the woof slantingly, or crookedly, or
strongly, or weakly, as the case might be ; and by
792



HERMAN MELVILLE



this difference in the concluding blow producing
a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the
completed fabric ; this savage's sword, thought I,
which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp
and woof ; this easy, indifferent sword must be
chance — aye, chance, free will, and necessity — no
wise incompatible — all interweavingly working to-
gether. The straight warp of necessity, not to be
swerved from its ultimate course — its every alternating
vibration, indeed, only tending to that ; free will still
free to ply her shuttle between given threads ; and
chance, though restrained in its play within the right
lines of necessity, and sideways in its motions directed
by free will, though thus prescribed to by both,
chance by turns rules either, and has the last featuring
blow at events.

*******

Thus we were weaving and weaving away when
I started at a sound so strange, long drawn, and
musically wild and unearthly, that the ball of free
will dropped from my hand, and I stood gazing up
at the clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing.
High aloft in the cross-trees was that mad Gay-
Header, Tashtego. His body was reaching eagerly
forward, his hand stretched out like a wand, and at
brief sudden intervals he continued his cries. To be
sure the same sound was that very moment perhaps
being heard all over the seas, from hundreds of whale-
men's look-outs perched as high in the air ; but from
few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have
derived such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego
the Indian's.

As he stood hovering over you half suspended in
air, so wildly and eagerly peering towards the horizon,

793



HERMAN MELVILLE



you would have thought him some prophet or seer
beholding the shadows of Fate, and by those wild
cries announcing their coming.

' There she blows ! there ! there ! there ! she
blows ! she blows ! '

' Where-away ? '

' On the lee-beam, about two miles off ! a school
of them ! '

Moby Dick

JOHN RUSKIN

1819-1900

457 *A Qathedral Qlose

AND now I wish that the reader, before I bring
XjL him into St. Mark's Place, would imagine him-
self for a little time in a quiet English cathedral town,
and walk with me to the west fr^ont of its cathedral.
Let us go together up the more retired street, at the
end of which we can see the pinnacles of one of the
towers, and then through the low grey gateway, with
its battlemented top and small latticed window in the
centre, into the inner private-looking road or close,
where nothing goes in but the carts of the tradesmen
who supply the bishop and the chapter, and where
there are little shaven grass-plots, fenced in by neat
rails, before old-fashioned groups of somewhat diminu-
tive and excessively trim houses, with little oriel and
bay windows jutting out here and there, and deep
wooden cornices and eaves painted cream colour and
white, and small porches to their doors in the shape of
cockle-shells, or little, crooked, thick, indescribable
wooden gables warped a little on one side ; and so
forward till we come to larger houses, also old-

794



JOHN RUSKIN

fashioned, but of red brick, and with gardens behind
them, and fruit walls, which show here and there,
among the nectarines, the vestiges of an old cloister
arch or shaft, and looking in front on the cathedral
square itself, laid out in rigid divisions of smooth
grass and gravel walk, yet not uncheerful, especially on
the sunny side, where the canons' children are walking
with their nurserymaids. And so, taking care not to
tread on the grass, we will go along the straight walk
to the west front, and there stand for a time, looking
up at its deep-pointed porches, and the dark places
between their pillars where there were statues once,
and where the fragments, here and there, of a stately
figure are still left, which has in it the likeness of a
king, perhaps indeed a king on earth, perhaps a saintly
king long ago in heaven ; and so higher and higher up
to the great mouldering wall of rugged sculpture and
confused arcades, shattered, and grey, and grisly with
heads of dragons and mocking fiends, worn by the
rain and swirling winds into yet unseemlier shape, and
coloured on their stony scales by the deep russet-orange
lichen, melancholy gold ; and so, higher still, to the
bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses itself
among the bosses of their traceries, though they are
rude and strong, and only sees like a drift of eddying
black points, now closing, now scattering, and now
settling suddenly into invisible places among the
bosses and flowers, the crowd of restless birds that fill
the whole square with that strange clangour of theirs,
so harsh and yet so soothing, like the cries of birds on
a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea.

Think for a little while of that scene, and the
meaning of all its small formalisms, mixed with its
serene sublimity. Estimate its secluded, continuous,

795



JOHN RUSKIN

drowsy felicities, and its evidence of the sense and
steady performance of such kind of duties as can be
regulated by the cathedral clock ,• and weigh the
influence of those dark towers on all who have passed
through the lonely square at their feet for centuries,
and on all who have seen them rising far away over the
wooded plain, or catching on their square masses the
last rays of the sunset, when the city at their feet was
indicated only by the mist at the bend of the river.

The Stones of Venice

458 The Two 'Boyhoods

i. Giorgione

HAVE you ever thought what a world his eyes
opened on — fair, searching eyes of youth ?
What a world of mighty life, from those mountain
roots to the shore ; — of loveliest life, when he went
down, yet so young, to the marble city — and became
himself as a fiery heart to it ?

A city of marble, did I say? nay, rather a golden
city, paved with emerald. For truly, every pinnacle
and turret glanced or glowed, overlaid with gold, or
bossed with jasper. Beneath, the unsullied sea drew
in deep breathing, to and fro, its eddies of green wave.
Deep-hearted, majestic, terrible as the sea, — the men
of Venice moved in sway of power and war ; pure as
her pillars of alabaster, stood her mothers and maidens ;
from foot to brow, all noble, walked her knights ; the
low bronzed gleaming of sea-rusted armour shot
angrily under their blood-red mantle-folds. Fearless,
faithful, patient, impenetrable, implacable, — every
word a fate — sate her senate. In hope and honour,
796



JOHN RUSKIN

lulled by flowing of wave around their isles of sacred
sand, each with his name written and the cross graved
at his side, lay her dead. A wonderful piece of world.
Rather, itself a world. It lay along the face of the
waters, no larger, as its captains saw it from their
masts at evening, than a bar of sunset that could not
pass away ; but for its power, it must have seemed to
them as if they were sailing in the expanse of heaven,
and this a great planet, whose orient edge widened
through ether. A world from which all ignoble care
and petty thoughts were banished, with all the common
and poor elements of life. No foulness, nor tumult,
in those tremulous streets, that filled, or fell, beneath
the moon ; but rippled music of majestic change, or
thrilling silence. No weak walls could rise above them ;
no low-roofed cottage, nor straw-built shed. Only the
strength as of rock, and the finished setting of stones
most precious. And around them, far as the eye
could reach, still the soft moving of stainless waters,
proudly pure ; as not the flower, so neither the thorn
nor the thistle, could grow in the glancing fields.
Ethereal strength of Alps, dreamlike, vanishing in high
procession beyond the Torcellan shore ; blue islands
of Paduan hills, poised in the golden west. Above,
free winds and fiery clouds ranging at their will ; —
brightness out of the north, and balm from the south,
and the stars of the evening and morning clear in the
limitless light of arched heaven and circling sea.

it. Turner

NFAR the south-west corner of Covent Garden,
a square brick pit or well is formed by a close-
set block of houses, to the back windows of which it
admits a few rays of light. Access to the bottom of

797



JOHN RUSKIN

it is obtained out of Maiden Lane, through a low
archway and an iron gate ; and if you stand long
enough under the archway to accustom your eyes to
the darkness you may see on the left hand a narrow
door, which formerly gave quiet access to a respectable
barber's shop, of which the front window, looking
into Maiden Lane, is still extant, filled, in this year
(i860), with a row of bottles, connected, in some
defunct manner, with a brewer's business. A more
fashionable neighbourhood, it is said, eighty years ago
than now — never certainly a cheerful one — wherein
a boy being born on St. George's day, 1775, began
soon after to take interest in the world of Covent
Garden, and put to service such spectacles of life as
it afforded.

No knights to be seen there, nor, I imagine, many
beautiful ladies ; their costume at least disadvan-
tageous, depending much on incumbency of hat and
feather, and short waists ; the majesty of men founded
similarly on shoebuckles and wigs ; — impressive enough
when Reynolds will do his best for it ; but not sug-
gestive of much ideal delight to a boy.

' Bello ovile dov' io dormii agnello : ' of things
beautiful, besides men and women, dusty sunbeams
up or down the street on summer mornings ; deep
furrowed cabbage-leaves at the greengrocer's ; magnifi-
cence of oranges in wheelbarrows round the corner ;
and Thames' shore within three minutes' race.

None of these things very glorious ; the best, how-
ever, that England, it seems, was then able to provide
for a boy of gift : who, such as they are, loves them —
never, indeed, forgets them. The short waists modify
to the last his visions of Greek ideal. His foiegrounds
had always a succulent cluster or two of greengrocery
798



JOHN RUSKIN

at the corners. Enchanted oranges gleam in Covent
Gardens of the Hesperides ; and great ships go to
pieces in order to scatter chests of them on the waves.
That mist of early sunbeams in the London dawn
crosses, many and many a time, the clearness of Italian
air ; and by Thames' shore, with its stranded barges
and glidings of red sail, dearer to us than Lucerne lake
or Venetian lagoon, — by Thames' shore we will die.

Modern Painters

WALT WHITMAN

1819-1892

459 Starlight, and Qarlyle Dying

FOR the last three years we in America have had
transmitted glimpses of a thin-bodied, lonesome,
wifeless, childless, very old man, lying on a sofa, kept
out of bed by indomitable will, but, of late, never well
enough to take the open air. I have noted this news
from time to time in brief descriptions in the papers.
A week ago I read such an item just before I started
out for my customary evening stroll between eight
and nine. In the fine cold night, unusually clear
(Feb. 5, '81), as I walk'd some open grounds adjacent,
the condition of Carlyle, and his approaching —
perhaps even then actual — death, filled me with
thoughts eluding statement, and curiously blending
with the scene. The planet Venus, an hour high in
the west, with all her volume and lustre recover'd
(she has been shorn and languid for nearly a year),
including an additional sentiment I never noticed
before — not merely voluptuous, Paphian, steeping,
fascinating — now with calm commanding seriousness
and hauteur — the Milo Venus now. Upward to the

799



WALT WHITMAN



zenith, Jupiter, Saturn, and the moon past her
quarter, trailing in procession, with the Pleiades
following, and the constellation Taurus, and red
Aldebaran. Not a cloud in heaven. Orion strode
through the south-east, with his glittering belt — and
a trifle below hung the sun of the night, Sirius. Every
star dilated, more vitreous, nearer than usual. Not
as in some clear nights when the larger stars entirely
outshine the rest. Every little star or cluster just as
distinctly visible, and just as nigh. Berenice's hair
showing every gem, and new ones. To the north-east
and north the Sickle, the Goat and lcids, Cassiopeia,
Castor and Pollux, and the two Dippers. While
through the whole of this silent indescribable show,
inclosing and bathing my whole receptivity, ran the
thought of Carlyle dying. (To soothe and spiritualize,
and, as far as may be, solve the mysteries of death
and genius, consider them under the stars at midnight.)

And now that he has gone hence, can it be that
Thomas Carlyle, soon to chemically dissolve in ashes
and by winds, remains an identity still ? In ways
perhaps eluding all the statements, lore, and specula-
tions of ten thousand years — eluding all possible
statements to mortal sense — does he yet exist, a definite,
vital being, a spirit, an individual — perhaps now
wafted in space among those stellar systems, which,
suggestive and limitless as they are, merely edge more
limitless, far more suggestive systems f I have no
doubt of it. In silence, of a fine night, such questions
are answer'd to the soul.

Specimen Days «» America



800



HENRY LONGUEVILLE MANSEL

1820-1871

460 ^Against c I(ational Theology

IF there is one dream of a godless philosophy to which,
beyond all others, every moment of our conscious-
ness gives the he, it is that which subordinates the
individual to the universal, the person to the species ;
which deifies kinds and realizes classifications ; which
sees Being in generalization, and Appearance in limita-
tion ; which regards the living and conscious man as
a wave on the ocean of the unconscious infinite ; his
life, a momentary tossing to and fro on the shifting
tide ; his destiny, to be swallowed up in the formless
and boundless universe. The final conclusion of this
philosophy, in direct antagonism to the voice of
consciousness, is ' I think ; therefore I am not.' When
men look around them in bewilderment for that which
lies within them ; when they talk of the enduring
species and the perishing individual, and would find,
in the abstractions which their own minds have made,
a higher and truer existence than in the mind which
made them ; they seek for that which they know, and
know not that for which they seek. They would fain
lift up the curtain of their own being, to view the
picture which it conceals. Like the painter of old,
they know not that the curtain is the picture.

It is our duty, then, to think of God as personal ;
and it is our duty to believe that He is infinite. It is
true that we cannot reconcile these two representations
with each other; as our conception of personality
involves attributes apparently contradictory to the
notion of infinity. But it does not follow that this
contradiction exists anywhere but in our own minds :
2830 D d 801



WALT WHITMAN



zenith, Jupiter, Saturn, and the moon past her
quarter, trailing in procession, with the Pleiades
following, and the constellation Taurus, and red
Aldebaran. Not a cloud in heaven. Orion strode
through the south-east, with his glittering belt — and
a trifle below hung the sun of the night, Sirius. Every
star dilated, more vitreous, nearer than usual. Not
as in some clear nights when the larger stars entirely
outshine the rest. Every little star or cluster just as
distinctly visible, and just as nigh. Berenice's hair
showing every gem, and new ones. To the north-east
and north the Sickle, the Goat and kids, Cassiopeia,
Castor and Pollux, and the two Dippers. While
through the whole of this silent indescribable show,
inclosing and bathing my whole receptivity, ran the
thought of Carlyle dying. (To soothe and spiritualize,
and, as far as may be, solve the mysteries of death
and genius, consider them under the stars at midnight.)

And now that he has gone hence, can it be that
Thomas Carlyle, soon to chemically dissolve in ashes
and by winds, remains an identity still f In ways
perhaps eluding all the statements, lore, and specula-
tions of ten thousand years — eluding all possible
statements to mortal sense — does he yet exist, a definite,
vital being, a spirit, an individual — perhaps now
wafted in space among those stellar systems, which,
suggestive and limitless as they are, merely edge more
limitless, far more suggestive systems ? I have no
doubt of it. In silence, of a fine night, such questions
are answer'd to the soul.

Specimen Days tn Amertca



800



HENRY LONGUEVILLE MANSEL

1820-1871

460 Against 'Rational 'Theology

IF there is one dream of a godless philosophy to which,
beyond all others, every moment of our conscious-
ness gives the lie, it is that which subordinates the
individual to the universal, the person to the species ;
which deifies kinds and realizes classifications ; which
sees Being in generalization, and Appearance in limita-
tion ; which regards the living and conscious man as
a wave on the ocean of the unconscious infinite ; his
life, a momentary tossing to and fro on the shifting
tide ; his destiny, to be swallowed up in the formless
and boundless universe. The final conclusion of this
philosophy, in direct antagonism to the voice of
consciousness, is ' I think ; therefore I am not.' When
men look around them in bewilderment for that which
lies within them ; when they talk of the enduring
species and the perishing individual, and would find,
in the abstractions which their own minds have made,
a higher and truer existence than in the mind which
made them ; they seek for that which they know, and
know not that for which they seek. They would fain
lift up the curtain of their own being, to view the
picture which it conceals. Like the painter of old,
they know not that the curtain is the picture.

It is our duty, then, to think of God as personal ;
and it is our duty to believe that He is infinite. It is
true that we cannot reconcile these two representations
with each other ; as our conception of personality
involves attributes apparently contradictory to the
notion of infinity. But it does not follow that this
contradiction exists anywhere but in our own minds :

2830 D d 801



HENRY LONGUEVILLE MANSEL



it does not follow that it implies any impossibility in
the absolute nature of God. The apparent contradic-
tion, in this case, as in those previously noticed, is the
necessary consequence of an attempt on the part of the
human thinker to transcend the boundaries of his
own consciousness. It proves that there are limits to
man's power of thought ; and it proves no more.

The preceding considerations are equally conclusive
against both the methods of metaphysical theology
described in my last Lecture ; that which commences
with the divine to reason down to the human, and
that which commences with the human to reason up
to the divine. For though the mere abstract expression
of the infinite, when regarded as indicating nothing
more than the negation of limitation, and therefore
of conceivability, is not contradictory in itself, it
becomes so the instant we attempt to apply it in
reasoning to any object of thought. A thing, an object,
an attribute, a person, or any other term signifying
one out of many possible objects of consciousness, is
by that very relation necessarily declared to be finite.
An infinite thing, or object, or attribute, or person, is
therefore in the same moment declared to be both
finite and infinite. We cannot, therefore, start from
any abstract assumption of the divine infinity, to
reason downwards to any object of human thought.
And on the other hand, if all human attributes are
conceived under the conditions of difference, and
relation, and time, and personality, we cannot represent
in thought any such attribute magnified to infinity ;
for this again is to conceive it as finite and infinite at
the same time. We can conceive such attributes, at
the utmost, only indefinitely : that is to say, we may
withdraw our thought, for the moment, from the fact
802



HENRY LONGUEVILLE MANSEL



of their being limited ; but we cannot conceive
them as infinite : that is to say, we cannot positively
think of the absence of the limit ; for, the instant
we attempt to do so, the antagonist elements of the
conception exclude one another, and annihilate the
whole.

The Limits of Religious Thought Examined

MATTHEW ARNOLD

1822-1888

461 Ideas in England

IN our greatest literary epoch, that of the Elizabethan
age, English society at large was accessible to ideas,
was permeated by them, was vivified by them, to
a degree which has never been reached in England
since. Hence the unique greatness in English literature
of Shakspeare and his contemporaries ; they were
powerfully upheld by the intellectual life of their
nation ; they applied freely in literature the then
modern ideas, — the ideas of the Renaissance and the
Reformation. A few years afterwards the great
English middle class, the kernel of the nation, the
class whose intelligent sympathy had upheld a Shak-
speare, entered the prison of Puritanism, and had the
key turned on its spirit there for two hundred years.
He enlargeth a nation, says Job, and straiteneth it again.
In the literary movement of the beginning of the
nineteenth century the signal attempt to apply freely
the modern spirit was made in England by two mem-
bers of the aristocratic class, Byron and Shelley.
Aristocracies are, as such, naturally impenetrable by-
ideas ; but their individual members have a high
courage and a turn for breaking bounds ; and a man

803



MATTHEW ARNOLD



of genius, who is the born child of the idea, happening
to be born in the aristocratic ranks, chafes against the
obstacles which prevent him from freely developing
it. But Byron and Shelley did not succeed in their
attempt freely to apply the modern spirit in English
literature ; they could not succeed in it ; the resistance
to baffle them, the want of intelligent sympathy to
guide and uphold them, were too great. Their
literary creation, compared with the literary creation
of Shakspeare and Spenser, compared with the literary
creation of Goethe and Heine, is a failure. The best
literary creation of that time in England proceeded
from men who did not make the same bold attempt as
Byron and Shelley. What, in fact, was the career of
the chief English men of letters, their contemporaries ?
The greatest of them, Wordsworth, retired (in Middle-
Age phrase) into a monastery. I mean, he plunged
himself in the inward life, he voluntarily cut himself
off from the modern spirit. Coleridge took to opium.
Scott became the historiographer-royal of feudalism.
Keats passionately gave himself up to a sensuous
genius, to his faculty for interpreting nature ; and he
died of consumption at twenty-five. Wordsworth,
Scott, and Keats have left admirable works ; far more
solid and complete works than those which Byron and
Shelley have left. But their works have this defect ; —
they do not belong to that which is the main current
of the literature of modern epochs, they do not apply
modern ideas to life ; they constitute, therefore, minor
currents, and all other literary work of our day, however
popular, which has the same defect, also constitutes
but a minor current. Byron and Shelley will long be
remembered, long after the inadequacy of their actual
work is clearly recognised, for their passionate, their
804



MATTHEW ARNOLD



Titanic effort to flow in the main stream of modern
literature ; their names will be greater than their
writings ; stat magni nominis umbra.

Essays in Crtltasm

462 Oxford

NO, we are all seekers still ! seekers often make
mistakes, and I wish mine to redound to my own
discredit only, and not to touch Oxford. Beautiful
city ! so venerable, so lovely, so unravaged by the
fierce intellectual life of our century, so serene !

'There are our young barbarians all at play I'

And yet, steeped in sentiment as she lies, spreading
her gardens to the moonlight, and whispering from
her towers the last enchantments of the Middle Age,
who will deny that Oxford, by her ineffable charm,
keeps ever calling us nearer to the true goal of all of
us, to the ideal, to perfection, — to beauty, in a word,
which is only truth seen from another side? — nearer,
perhaps, than all the science of Tubingen. Adorable
dreamer, whose heart has been so romantic ! who
hast given thyself so prodigally, given thyself to sides
and to heroes not mine, only never to the Philistines !
home of lost causes, and forsaken beliefs, and unpopular
names, and impossible loyalties ! what example could
ever so inspire us to keep down the Philistine in our-
selves, what teacher could ever so save us from that
bondage to which we are all prone, that bondage
which Goethe, in those incomparable lines on the death
of Schiller, makes it his friend's highest praise (and
nobly did Schiller deserve the praise) to have left miles
out of sight behind him ; — the bondage of ' was uns

8°S



MATTHEW ARNOLD



die bandigt, DAS GEMEINE / ' She will forgive
me, even if I have unwittingly drawn upon her a shot
or two aimed at her unworthy son ; for she is generous,
and the cause in which I fight is, after all, hers. Appari-
tions of a day, what is our puny warfare against the
Philistines, compared with the warfare which this
queen of romance has been waging against them for
centuries, and will wage after we are gone f

Essays in Criticism

463 £Milton

THE verse of the poets of Greece and Rome no
translation can adequately reproduce. Prose
cannot have the power of verse ; verse-translation may
give whatever of charm is in the soul and talent of the
translator himself, but never the specific charm of the
verse and poet translated. In our race are thousands
of readers, presently there will be millions, who know
not a word of Greek and Latin, and will never learn
those languages. If this host of readers are ever to
gain any sense of the power and charm of the great
poets of antiquity, their way to gain it is not through
translations of the ancients, but through the original
poetry of Milton, who has the like power and charm,
because he has the like great style.

Through Milton they may gain it, for, in conclusion,
Milton is English ; this master in the great style of
the ancients is English. Virgil, whom Milton loved
and honoured, has at the end of the Mneii a noble
passage, where Juno, seeing the defeat of Turnus and
the Italians imminent, the victory of the Trojan
invaders assured, entreats Jupiter that Italy may
nevertheless survive and be herself still, may retain
806



MATTHEW ARNOLD



her own mind, manners, and language, and not adopt
those of the conqueror.

' Sit Latium, sint Albani per secula reges ! '
Jupiter grants the prayer ; he promises perpetuity
and the future to Italy — Italy reinforced by what-
ever virtue the Trojan race has, but Italy, not Troy.
This we may take as a sort of parable suiting ourselves.
All the Anglo-Saxon contagion, all the flood of Anglo-
Saxon commonness, beats vainly against the great
style but cannot shake it, and has to accept its triumph.
But it triumphs in Milton, in one of our own race,
tongue, faith, and morals. Milton has made the great
style no longer an exotic here ; he has made it an
inmate amongst us, a leaven, and a power. Neverthe-
less lie, and his hearers on both sides of the Atlantic,
are English, and will remain English

' Sermonem Ausonn patnum moresque tenebunt.'
The English race overspreads the world, and at the
same time the ideal of an excellence the most high and
the most rare abides a possession with it for ever.

Essays in Criticism : Second Series

HENRY JAMES SUMNER MAINE

1822-1888

464 'Political '•Parties

PARTY has many strong affinities with religion.
Its devotees, like those of a religious creed, are
apt to substitute the fiction that they have adopted
it upon mature deliberation for the fact that they
were born into it or stumbled into it. But they are
in the highest degree reluctant to come to an open
breach with it ; they count it shame to speak of its

807



HENRY JAMES SUMNER MAINE

weak points, except to co-religionists ; and, whenever
it is in serious difficulty, they return to its assistance
or rescue. Their relation to those outside the pale —
the relation of Whig to Tory, of Conservative to
Liberal — is on the whole exceedingly like that of Jew
to Samaritan. But the closest resemblances are be-
tween party discipline and military discipline; and
indeed, historically speaking, Party is probably nothing
more than a survival and a consequence of the primitive
combativeness of mankind. It is war without the city
transmuted into war within the city, but mitigated
in the process. The best historical justification which
can be offered for it is that it has often enabled portions
of the nation, who would otherwise be armed enemies,
to be only factions. Party strife, like strife in arms,
develops many high but imperfect and one-sided
virtues ; it is fruitful of self-denial and self-sacrifice.
But wherever it prevails, a great part of ordinary
morality is unquestionably suspended ; a number of
maxims are received, which are not those of religion
or ethics ; and men do acts which, except as between
enemies, and except as between political opponents,
would be very generally classed as either immoralities
or sins.

Popular Government

THOMAS HUGHES

1822-1896

465 Qoaching to School

TOM stands up on the coach and looks back at his
father's figure as long as he can see it, and then the
guard, having disposed of his luggage, comes to an
anchor, and finishes his buttonings and other prepara-
808



THOMAS HUGHES



tions for facing the three hours before dawn ; no joke
for those who minded cold, on a fast coach in Novem-
ber, in the reign of his late Majesty.

I sometimes think that you boys of this generation
are a deal tenderer fellows than we used to be. At any
rate you're much more comfortable travellers, for I
see every one of you with his rug or plaid, and other
dodges for preserving the caloric, and most of you
going in those fuzzy, dusty, padded first-class carriages.
It was another affair altogether, a dark ride on the top
of the Tally-ho, I can tell you, in a tight Petersham
coat, and your feet dangling six inches from the floor.
Then you knew what cold was, and what it was to be
without legs, for not a bit of feeling had you in them
after the first half-hour. But it had its pleasures,
the old dark ride. First there was the consciousness
of silent endurance, so dear to every Englishman, — of
standing out against something, and not giving in.
Then there was the music of the rattling harness, and
the ring of the horses' feet on the hard road, and the
glare of the two bright lamps through the steaming
hoar frost, over the leaders' ears, into the darkness ;
and the cheery toot of the guard's horn, to warn some
drowsy pikeman or the ostler at the next change ;
and the looking forward to daylight — and last but
not least, the delight of returning sensation in your
toes.

Then the break of dawn and the sunrise, where can
they be ever seen in perfection but from a coach roof I
You want motion and change and music to see them in
their glory ; not the music of singing-men and singing-
women, but good silent music, which sets itself in your
own head, the accompaniment of work and getting
over the ground.

809



THOMAS HUGHES



The Tally-ho is past St. Alban's, and Tom is enjoy-
ing the ride, though half-frozen. The guard, who is
alone with him on the back of the coach, is silent, but
has muffled Tom's feet up in straw, and put the end
of an oat-sack over his knees. The darkness has driven
him inwards, and he has gone over his little past life,
and thought of all his doings and promises, and of his
mother and sister, and his father's last words ; and has
made fifty good resolutions, and means to bear himself
like a brave Brown as he is, though a young one. Then
he has been forward into the mysterious boy-future,
speculating as to what sort of a place Rugby is, and
what they do there, and calling up all the stories of
public schools which he has heard from big boys in the
holidays. He is chock full of hope and life, notwith-
standing the cold, and kicks his heels against the back
board, and would like to sing, only he doesn't know how
his friend the silent guard might take it. . .

And now they begin to see, and the early life of the
country-side comes out ; a market-cart or two, men in
smock-frocks going to their work pipe in mouth, a
whiff of which is no bad smell this bright morning.
The sun gets up, and the mist shines like silver gauze.
They pass the hounds jogging along to a distant meet,
at the heels of the huntsman's hack, whose face is
about the colour of the tails of his old pink, as he
exchanges greetings with coachman and guard. Now
they pull up at a lodge, and take on board a well-
mufHed-up sportsman, with his gun-case and carpet-
bag. An early up-coach meets them, and the coach-
men gather up their horses, and pass one another with
the accustomed lift of the elbow, each team doing
eleven miles an hour, with a mile to spare behind if
necessary. And here comes breakfast.

810



THOMAS HUGHES



' Twenty minutes here, gentlemen,' says the coach-
man, as they pull up at half-past seven at the inn-door.

Tom Brown's Schooldays

466 The First 'Bump

THERE it comes, at last — the flash of the starting
gun. Long before the sound of the report can
roll up the river, the whole pent-up life and energy
which has been held in leash, as it were, for the last
six minutes, is let loose, and breaks away with a bound
and a dash which he who has felt it will remember for
his life, but the like of which, will he ever feel again ?
The starting ropes drop from the coxswains' hands,
the oars flash into the water, and gleam on the feather,
the spray flies from them, and the boats leap forward.

The crowds on the bank scatter, and rush along,
each keeping as near as it may be to its own boat.
Some of the men on the towing path, some on the very
edge of, often in, the water — some slightly in advance,
as if they could help to drag their boat forward — some
behind, where they can see the pulling better — but all
at full speed, in wild excitement, and shouting at the
top of their voices to those on whom the honour of
the college is laid.

'Well pulled, all!' 'Pick her up there, five!'
' You're gaining, every stroke ! ' ' Time in the bows ! '
' Bravo, St. Ambrose ! '

On they rushed by the side of the boats, jostling one
another, stumbling, struggling, and panting along.

For a quarter of a mile along the bank the glorious
maddening hurly-burly extends, and rolls up the side
of the stream.

For the first ten strokes Tom was in too great fear

811



THOMAS HUGHES

of making a mistake to feel or hear or see. His whole
soul was glued to the back of the man before him, his
one thought to keep time, and get his strength into
the stroke. But as the crew settled down into the well-
known long sweep, what we may call consciousness
returned ; and while every muscle in his body was
straining, and his chest heaved, and his heart leapt,
every nerve seemed to be gathering new life, and his
senses to wake into unwonted acuteness. He caught
the scent of the wild thyme in the air, and found room
in his brain to wonder how it could have got there,
as he had never seen the plant near the river, or smelt
it before. Though his eye never wandered from the
back of Diogenes, he seemed to see all things at once.
The boat behind, which seemed to be gaining — it was
all he could do to prevent himself from quickening
on the stroke as he fancied that — the eager face of
Miller, with his compressed lips, and eyes fixed so
earnestly ahead that Tom could almost feel the glance
passing over his right shoulder ; the flying banks and
the shouting crowd ; see them with his bodily eyes
he could not, but he knew nevertheless that Grey
had been upset and nearly rolled down the bank into
the water in the first hundred yards, that Jack was
bounding and scrambling and barking along by the
very edge of the stream ; above all, he was just as
well aware as if he had been looking at it, of a stalwart
form in cap and gown, bounding along, brandishing
the long boat-hook, and always keeping just opposite
the boat ; and amid all the Babel of voices, and the
dash and pulse of the stroke, and the labouring of
his own breathing, he heard Hardy's voice coming to
him again and again, and clear as if there had been
no other sound in the air, ' Steady, two ! steady ! well
812



THOMAS HUGHES



pulled ! steady, steady ! ' The voice seemed to give
him strength and keep him to his work. And what work
it was ! he had had many a hard pull in the last six
weeks, but ' never aught like this.'

But it can't last for ever ; men's muscles are not
steel, or their lungs bull's hide, and hearts can't go on
pumping a hundred miles an hour long without burst-
ing. The St. Ambrose boat is well away from the
boat behind, there is a great gap between the accom-
panying crowds ; and now, as they near the Gut, she
hangs for a moment or two in hand, though the roar
from the bank grows louder and louder, and Tom is
already aware that the St. Ambrose crowd is melting
into the one ahead of them.

' We must be close to Exeter ! ' The thought
flashes into him, and it would seem into the rest of
the crew at the same moment. For, all at once, the
strain seems taken off their arms again ; there is no
more drag ; she springs to the stroke as she did at
the start ; and Miller's face, which had darkened
for a few seconds, lightens up again.

Miller's face and attitude are a study. Coiled up
into the smallest possible space, his chin almost resting
on his knees, his hands close to his sides, firmly but
lightly feeling the rudder, as a good horseman handles
the mouth of a free-going hunter, — if a coxswain
could make a bump by his own exertions, surely he
will do it. No sudden jerks of the St. Ambrose rudder
will you see, watch as you will from the bank ; the
boat never hangs through fault of his, but easily and
gracefully rounds every point. ' You're gaining !
you're gaining ! ' he now and then mutters to the
Captain, who responds with a wink, keeping his breath
for other matters. Isn't he grand, the Captain, as

813



THOMAS HUGHES

he comes forward like lightning, stroke after stroke,
his back fiat, his teeth set, his whole frame working
from the hips with the regularity of a machine? As
the space still narrows, the eyes of the fiery little
coxswain flash with excitement, but he is far too good
a judge to hurry the final effort before the victory is
safe in his grasp.

The two crowds are mingled now, and no mistake ;
and the shouts come all in a heap over the water.
' Now, St. Ambrose, six strokes more.' ' Now, Exeter,
you're gaining ; pick her up.' ' Mind the Gut,
Exeter.' ' Bravo, St. Ambrose.' The water rushes
by, still eddying from the strokes of the boat ahead.
Tom fancies now he can hear their oars and the
workings of their rudder, and the voice of their cox-
swain. In another moment both boats are in the Gut,
and a perfect storm of shouts reaches them from the
crowd, as it rushes madly off to the left to the foot-
bridge, amidst which ' Oh, well steered, well steered,
St. Ambrose ! ' is the prevailing cry. Then Miller,
motionless as a statue till now, lifts his right hand and
whirls the tassel round his head : ' Give it her now,
boys ; six strokes and we're into them.' Old Jervis
lays down that great broad back, and lashes his oar
through the water with the might of a giant, the crew
catch him up in another stroke, the tight new boat
answers to the spurt, and Tom feels a little shock
behind him, and then a grating sound, as Miller shouts,
' Unship oars bow and three,' and the nose of the
St. Ambrose boat glides quietly up the side of the
Exeter, till it touches their stroke oar.

Tom Brown at Oxford



814



COVENTRY PATMORE

1823-1896

467 Stable <EManners

THERE is nothing comparable for moral force to
the charm of truly noble manners. The mind is,
in comparison, only slightly and transiently impressed
by heroic actions, for these are felt to be but uncertain
signs of a heroic soul ; nothing less than a series of
them, more sustained and varied than circumstances
are ever found to demand, could assure us, with the
infallible certainty required for the highest power of
example, that they were the faithful reflex of the
ordinary spirit of the actor. The spectacle of patient
suffering, though not so striking, is morally more
impressive ; for we know that

Action is transitory — a step, a blow,
The motion of a muscle this way or that —
Tis done ; and, in the after vacancy,
We wonder at ourselves, like men betrayed ;
Suffering is permanent, obscure, and dark,
And has the nature of infinity.

The mind, however, has a very natural repugnance
to the sustained contemplation of this species of
example, and is much more willingly persuaded by
a spectacle precisely the reverse — namely, that of good-
ness actually upon the earth triumphant, and bearing
in its ordinary demeanour, under whatever circum-
stances, the lovely stamp of obedience to that highest
and most rarely-fulfilled commandment, ' Rejoice
evermore.' Unlike action or suffering, such obedience
is not so much the way to heaven, as a picture, say
rather a part, of heaven itself ; and truly beautiful
manners will be found upon inspection to involve
a continual and visible compliance with that apostolical

815



COVENTRY PATMORE



injunction. A right obedience of this kind must be
the crown and completion of all lower kinds of
obedience. It is not compatible with the bitter
humiliations of the habit of any actual sin ; it excludes
selfishness, since the condition of joy, as distinguished
from pleasure, is generosity, and a soul in the practice
of going forth from itself ; it is no sensual partiality
for the ' bright side ' of things, no unholy repugnance
to the consideration of sorrow ; but a habit of lifting
life to a height at which all sides of it become bright,
and all moral difficulties intelligible : in action it is
a salubrity about which doctors will not disagree ; in
the countenance it is a loveliness which connoisseurs
will not dispute ; in the demeanour it is a lofty
gentleness, which, without pride, patronises all the
world, and which, without omitting the minutest
temporal obligations or amenities, does everything
with an air of immortality.

Prtnaple in Art

FRANCIS PARKMAN

1823-1893

468 The Heights of <tAbraham

FOR full two hours the procession of boats, borne
on the current, steered silently down the St
Lawrence. The stars were visible, but the night was
moonless and sufficiently dark. The General was in
one of the foremost boats, and near him was a young
midshipman, John Robison, afterwards professor of
natural philosophy in the University of Edinburgh.
He used to tell in his later life how Wolfe, with a low
voice, repeated Gray's Elegy tn a Country Churchyard
to the officers about him. Probably it was to relieve
816



FRANCIS PARKMAN



the intense strain of his thoughts. Among the rest
was the verse which his own fate was soon to illustrate —

' The paths of glory lead but to the grave.'

' Gentlemen,' he said, as his recital ended, ' I would
rather have written those lines than take Quebec'
None were there to tell him that the hero is greater
than the poet.

As they neared their destination, the tide bore
them in towards the shore, and the mighty wall of
rock and forest towered in darkness on their left.
The dead stillness was suddenly broken by the sharp
Qui mve ! of a French sentry, invisible in the thick
gloom. France ! answered a Highland officer of
Fraser's regiment from one of the boats of the light
infantry. He had served in Holland, and spoke French
fluently.

A quel regiment ?

De la Reine, replied the Highlander. He knew
that a part of that corps was with Bougainville. The
sentry, expecting the convoy of provisions, was
satisfied, and did not ask for the password.

Soon after, the foremost boats were passing the
heights of Samos, when another sentry challenged
them, and they could see him through the darkness
running down to the edge of the water, within range
of a pistol-shot. In answer to his questions, the same
officer replied, in French : ' Provision-boats. Don't
make a noise ; the English will hear us.' In fact, the
sloop-of-war ' Hunter ' was anchored in the stream
not far off. This time, again, the sentry let them pass.
In a few moments they rounded the headland above
the Anse du Foulon. There was no sentry there.
The strong current swept the boats of the light

817



FRANCIS PARKMAN



infantiy a little below the intended landing-place.
They disembarked on a narrow strand at the foot of
heights as steep as a hill covered with trees can be.
The twenty-four volunteers led the way, climbing
with what silence they might, closely followed by
a much larger body. When they reached the top
they saw in the dim light a cluster of tents at a short
distance, and immediately made a dash at them.
Vergor leaped from bed and tried to run off, but was
shot in the heel and captured. His men, taken by
surprise, made little resistance. One or two were
caught, and the rest fled.

The main body of troops waited in their boats by
the edge of the strand. The heights near by were
cleft by a great ravine choked with forest trees ; and
in its depths ran a little brook called Ruisseau
St.-Denis, which, swollen by the late rains, fell
plashing in the stillness over a rock. Other than this
no sound could reach the strained ear of Wolfe but
the gurgle of the tide and the cautious climbing of
his advance-parties as they mounted the steeps at
some little distance from where he sat listening. At
length from the top came a sound of musket-shots,
followed by loud huzzas, and he knew that his men were
masters of the position. The word was given ; the
troops leaped from the boats and scaled the heights,
some here, some there, clutching at trees and bushes,
their muskets slung at their backs. Tradition still
points out the place, near the mouth of the ravine,
where the foremost reached the top. Wolfe said to
an officer near him : ' You can try it, but I don't
think you'll get up.' He himself, however, found
strength to drag himself up with the rest. The narrow
slanting path on the face of the heights had been made
818



FRANCIS PARKMAN



impassable by trenches and abattis ; but all obstruc-
tions were soon cleared away, and then the descent
was easy. In the gray of the morning the long file
of red-coated soldiers moved quickly upward, and
formed in order on the plateau above.

Montcalm and Wolfe

HENRY WALTER BATES

1825-1892

469 <iA frQzturalisf 's Day in the 'Tropics

WE used to rise soon after dawn, when Isidoro
would go down to the city, after supplying us
with a cup of coffee, to purchase the fresh provisions for
the day. The two hours before breakfast were devoted
to ornithology. At that early period of the day the
sky was invariably cloudless (the thermometer marking
72 or 73 Fahr.) ; the heavy dew or the previous
night's rain, which lay on the moist foliage, becoming
quickly dissipated by the glowing sun, which, rising
straight out of the east, mounted rapidly towards the
zenith. All nature was fresh, new leaf and flower-
buds expanding rapidly. Some mornings a single
tree would appear in flower amidst what was the
preceding evening a uniform green mass of forest —
a dome of blossom suddenly created as if by magic.
The birds were all active ; from the wild-fruit trees,
not far off, we often heard the shrill yelping of the
Toucans (Rhamphastos vitellinus). Small flocks of
parrots flew over on most mornings, at a great height,
appearing in distinct relief against the blue sky,
always two by two, chattering to each other, the pairs
being separated by regular intervals ; their bright

819



HENRY WALTER BATES

colours, however, were not apparent at that height.
After breakfast we devoted the hours from 10 a.m. to
2 or 3 p.m. to entomology ; the best time for insects
in the forest being a little before the greatest heat of
the day. We did not find them at all numerous,
although of great variety as to species. . . After several
years' observation, I came to the conclusion that the
increase of these creatures was checked by the close
persecution of insectivorous animals, which are exces-
sively numerous in this country. The check operates
at all periods of life — on the eggs, the larvae, and the
perfect insects.

The heat increased rapidly towards two o'clock
(92 and 93 Fahr.), by which time every voice of
bird or mammal was hushed ; only in the trees was
heard at intervals the harsh whirr of a cicada. The
leaves, which were so moist and fresh in early morning,
now became lax and drooping ; the flowers shed their
petals. Our neighbours, the Indian and Mulatto
inhabitants of the open palm-thatched huts, as we
returned home fatigued with our ramble, were either
asleep in their hammocks or seated on mats in the
shade, too languid even to talk. On most days in
June and July a heavy shower would fall some time in
the afternoon, producing a most welcome coolness.
The approach of the rain-clouds was after a uniform
fashion, very interesting to observe. First, the cool
sea-breeze, which commenced to blow about 10 o'clock,
and which had increased in force with the increasing
power of the sun, would flag and finally die away.
The heat and electric tension of the atmosphere would
then become almost insupportable. Languor and
uneasiness would seize on every one ; even the
denizens of the forest betraying it by their motions.
820



HENRY WALTER BATES



White clouds would appear in the east and gather
into cumuli, with an increasing blackness along their
lower portions. The whole eastern horizon would
become almost suddenly black, and this would spread
upwards, the sun at length becoming obscured. Then
the rush of a mighty wind is heard through the forest,
swaying the tree-tops ; a vivid flash of lightning bursts
forth, then a crash of thunder, and down streams the
deluging rain. Such storms soon cease, leaving bluish-
black motionless clouds in the sky until night. Mean-
time all nature is refreshed ; but heaps of flower-
petals and fallen leaves are seen under the trees.
Towards evening life revives again, and the ringing
uproar is resumed from bush and tree. The following
morning the sun again rises in a cloudless sky, and so
the cycle is completed ; spring, summer, and autumn,
as it were, in one tropical day. . .

In Europe, a woodland scene has its spring, its summer,
its autumnal, and its winter aspects. In the equatorial
forests the aspect is the same or nearly so every day
in the year : budding, flowering, fruiting, and leaf-
shedding are always going on in one species or other.
The activity of birds and insects proceeds without
interruption, each species having its own separate
times ; the colonies of wasps, for instance, do not die
off annually, leaving only the queens, as in cold
climates ; but the succession of generations and
colonies goes on incessantly. It is never either spring,
summer, or autumn, but each day is a combination
of all three. With the day and night always of equal
length, the atmospheric disturbances of each day
neutralising themselves before each succeeding morn ;
with the sun in its course proceeding mid-way across
the sky, and the daily temperature the same within

821



HENRY WALTER BATES

two or three degrees throughout the year — how grand
in its perfect equilibrium and simplicity is the march
of Nature under the equator !

A Naiuraltst on the Amazons

THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY

1825-1895

470 tA Qame of Chess

SUPPOSE it were perfectly certain that the life
and fortune of every one of us would, one day or
other, depend upon his winning or losing a game at
chess.

Don't you think that we should all consider it to be
a primary duty to learn at least the names and the
moves of the pieces ; to have a notion of a gambit,
and a keen eye for all the means of giving and getting
out of check ? Do you not think that we should look
with a disapprobation amounting to scorn, upon the
father who allowed his son, or the state which allowed
its members, to grow up without knowing a pawn
from a knight ?

Yet it is a very plain and elementary truth, that the
life, the fortune, and the happiness of every one of
us, and, more or less, of those who are connected with
us, do depend upon our knowing something of the
rules of a game infinitely more difficult and complicated
than chess. It is a game which has been played for
untold ages, every man and woman of us being one
of the two players in a game of his or her own. The
chess-board is the world, the pieces are the phenomena
of the universe, the rules of the game are what we
call the laws of Nature.

The player on the other side is hidden from us.
822



THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY

We know that his play is always fair, just, and patient.
But also we know, to our cost, that he never overlooks
a mistake, or makes the smallest allowance for ignor-
ance. To the man who plays well, the highest stakes
are paid, with that sort of overflowing generosity
with which the strong shows delight in strength. And
one who plays ill is checkmated — without haste, but
without remorse.

My metaphor will remind some of you of the
famous picture in which Retzsch has depicted Satan
playing at chess with man for his soul. Substitute
for the mocking fiend in that picture, a calm, strong
angel who is playing for love, as we say, and would
rather lose than win — and I should accept it as an
image of human life.

Lay Sermons

• LORD ' GEORGE SANGER

1825-1911

471 aA "Pair and a Fire

I HAVE reason to remember that particular Stepney
Fair. . . There was an enormous rope factory on
one side of the green, an establishment that extended
over a piece of ground running quite into the country,
and on the last day of the fair this was suddenly
discovered to be on fire. It was just towards dusk
when the flames were first seen, and in a very little
time they had made tremendous headway. The
excitement was intense, the people flocking from the
fair to witness the fire and to render what assistance
they could. With the pleasure seekers went the
showmen, one and all, to give what aid was possible,
and an extraordinary scene was the result. There was

823



• LORD ' GEORGE SANGER



no time to take off dresses, and amid the flying sparks,
and in and about the burning buildings, could be seen
clowns, knights in armour, Indian chiefs, jugglers in
tights and spangles, rope walkers in fleshings — in fact,
all the characters of the fair in full dress, striving with
might and main to combat the flames. Here would
be seen clown, pantaloon, harlequin, and demon
passing buckets from hand to hand, while at another
point was the feeble parish engine, manned by sweating
Saracens, Crusaders, Roman gladiators, and such-like,
pumping as though their very lives depended on their
exertions. Up on the building, running along beams
with crowbars and hatchets, were the tight-rope
walkers, vaulters, and acrobats, whose training enabled
them to go where no other persons could possibly
have clambered, breaking away roofs and walls to
prevent the spread of the fire. Over all was the glow
of the flames lighting up the faces of the dense multi-
tude that surged and swung and shouted its approval
of the efforts of the motley-garbed show-folk to check
the advance of the enemy.

It was a picture that would have delighted a painter
of weird scenes, though he might have despaired of
ever putting its wavering lights and shadows and the
strange characters glancing through them effectively
on canvas. I know it impressed itself indelibly on my
memory, as in my Hamlet dress I took my share of
work with the others in checking the roaring flames.
At last our efforts told, and we did check them, but
not until enormous damage had been done. A big
part of the works was, however, saved, and so pleased
were the authorities at the spirit the showmen had
exhibited that they gave orders for the fair to continue
another day to help make up any losses we had sus-
824



* LORD ' GEORGE SANGER



tained through leaving our booths to become fire
fighters.

We did rare business on the extra day, for the
story of the fire had spread, and the public came in
crowds to view the scene and to patronize the showmen
who had worked so well.

Seventy Years of a Showman's Life

WALTER BAGEHOT

1826-1877

472 The Old Private "Banker

I CAN imagine nothing better in theory or more
successful in practice than private banks as they
were in the beginning. A man of known wealth,
known integrity, and known ability is largely entrusted
with the money of his neighbours. The confidence
is strictly personal. His neighbours know him, and
trust him because they know him. They see daily
his manner of life, and judge from it that their con-
fidence is deserved. In rural districts, and in former
times, it was difficult for a man to ruin himself except
at the place in which he lived ; for the most part he
spent his money there, and speculated there if he
speculated at all. Those who lived there also would
soon see if he was acting in a manner to shake their
confidence. Even in large cities, as cities then were,
it was possible for most persons to ascertain with fair
certainty the real position of conspicuous persons, and
to learn all which was material in fixing their credit.
Accordingly the bankers who for a long series of years
passed successfully this strict and continual investiga-
tion, became very wealthy and very powerful.

825



WALTER BAGEHOT

The name ' London Banker ' had especially a charmed
value. He was supposed to represent, and often did
represent, a certain union of pecuniary sagacity and
educated refinement which was scarcely to be found
in any other part of society. In a time when the
trading classes were much ruder than they now are,
many private bankers possessed a variety of knowledge
and a delicacy of attainment which would even now
be very rare. Such a position is indeed singularly
favourable. The calling is hereditary ; the credit of
the bank descends from father to son : this inherited
wealth soon brings inherited refinement. Banking is
a watchful, but not a laborious trade. A banker, even
in large business, can feel pretty sure that all his
transactions are sound, and yet have much spare mind.
A certain part of his time, and a considerable part of
his thoughts, he can readily devote to other pursuits.
And a London banker can also have the most intel-
lectual society in the world if he chooses it. There
has probably very rarely ever been so happy a position
as that of a London private banker ; and never
perhaps a happier.

Lombard Street

GEORGE MEREDITH

i 828-1909

4J3 Diversion on a Venny Whistle

A WAY with Systems ! Away with a corrupt World !
XX. Let us breathe the air of the Enchanted Island.

Golden lie the meadows : golden run the streams ;
red gold is on the pine-stems. The sun is coming
down to earth, and walks the fields and the waters.
826



GEORGE MEREDITH



The sun is coming down to earth, and the fields
and the waters shout to him golden shouts. He comes,
and his heralds run before him, and touch the leaves
of oaks and planes and beeches lucid green, and the
pine-stems redder gold ; leaving brightest footprints
upon thickly-weeded banks, where the foxglove's last
upper-bells incline, and bramble-shoots wander amid
moist rich herbage. The plumes of the woodland are
alight ; and beyond them, over the open, 'tis a race
with the long-thrown shadows ; a race across the
heaths and up the hills, till, at the farthest bourne
of mounted eastern cloud, the heralds of the sun lay
rosy fingers and rest.

Sweet are the shy recesses of the woodland. The
ray treads softly there. A film athwart the pathway
quivers many-hued against purple shade fragrant with
warm pines, deep moss-beds, feathery ferns. The
little brown squirrel drops tail, and leaps ; the inmost
bird is startled to a chance tuneless note. From
silence into silence things move.

Peeps of the revelling splendour above and around
enliven the conscious full heart within. The flaming
West, the crimson heights, shower their glories
through voluminous leafage. But these are bowers
where deep bliss dwells, imperial joy, that owes no
fealty to yonder glories, in which the young lamb
gambols and the spirits of men are glad. Descend,
great Radiance ! embrace creation with beneficent
fire, and pass from us ! You and the vice-regal light
that succeeds to you, and all heavenly pageants, are
the ministers and the slaves of the throbbing content
within.

For this is the home of the enchantment. Here,
secluded from vexed shores, the prince and princess

837



GEORGE MEREDITH



of the island meet : here like darkling nightingales
they sit, and into eyes and ears and hands pour endless
ever-fresh treasures of their souls.

Roll on, grinding wheels of the world : cries of
ships going down in a calm, groans of a System which
will not know its rightful hour of exultation, complain
to the universe. You are not heard here.

He calls her by her name, Lucy : and she, blushing
at her great boldness, has called him by his, Richard.
Those two names are the key-notes of the wonderful
harmonies the angels sing aloft.

' Lucy ! my beloved ! '

' O Richard ! '

Out in the world there, on the skirts of the wood-
land, a sheep-boy pipes to meditative eve on a penny
whistle.

Love's musical instrument is as old, and as poor : it
has but two stops ; and yet, you see, the cunning
musician does thus much with it !

The Ordeal of Richard Fever el



474 Qlara £Middleton

SHE had the mouth that smiles in repose. The lips
met full on the centre of the bow and thinned
along to a lifting dimple ; the eyelids also lifted
slightly at the outer corners and seemed, like the lip
into the limpid cheek, quickening up the temples, as
with a run of light, or the ascension indicated off
a shoot of colour. Her features were playfellows of
one another, none of them pretending to rigid correct-
ness, nor the nose to the ordinary dignity of governess
among merry girls, despite which the nose was of
828



GEORGE MEREDITH

a fair design, not acutely interrogative or inviting to
gambols. Aspens imaged in water, waiting for the
breeze, would offer a susceptible lover some suggestion
of her face : a pure smooth-white face, tenderly
flushed in the cheeks, where the gentle dints were
faintly intermelting even during quietness. Her eyes
were brown, set well between mild lids, often shadowed,
not unwakeful. Her hair of lighter brown, swelling
above her temples on the sweep to the knot, imposed
the triangle of the fabulous wild woodland visage from
brow to mouth and chin, evidently in agreement with
her taste ; and the triangle suited her ; but her face
was not significant of a tameless wildness or of weakness;
her equable shut mouth threw its long curve to guard
the small round chin from that effect ; her eyes
wavered only in humour, they were steady when
thoughtfulness was awakened ; and at such seasons
the build of her winter-beechwood hair lost the touch
of nymph-like and whimsical, and strangely, by mere
outline, added to her appearance of studious con-
centration. Observe the hawk on stretched wings
over the prey he spies, for an idea of this change in
the look of a young lady whom Vernon Whitford
could liken to the Mountain Echo, and Mrs. Mount-
stuart Jenkinson pronounced to be ' a dainty rogue
m porcelain.'

The Egoist

475 Damon in the ^Mountains

BEYOND the firwood light was visibly the dawn's.
Half-way down the ravines it resembled the light
cast off a torrent water. It lay on the grass like a sheet
of unreflecting steel, and was a face without a smile

829



GEORGE MEREDITH



above. Their childhood ran along the tracks to the
forest by the light, which was neither dim nor cold,
but grave ; presenting tree and shrub and dwarf
growth and grass austerely, not deepening or confusing
them. They wound their way by borders of crag,
seeing in a dell below the mouth of the idle mine begirt
with weedy and shrub-hung rock, a dripping semi-
circle. Farther up they came on the flat juniper
and crossed a wet ground-thicket of whortleberry :
their feet were in the moist moss among sprigs of
heath ; and a great fir tree stretched his length, a
peeled multitude of his dead fellows leaned and stood
upright in the midst of scattered fire-stained members,
and through their skeleton limbs the sheer precipice
of slate-rock of the bulk across the chasm, nursery of
hawk and eagle, wore a thin blue tinge, the sign of
warmer light abroad.

' This way, my brother ! ' cried Carinthia, shudder-
ing at a path he was about to follow.

Dawn in the mountain-land is a meeting of many
friends. The pinnacle, the forest-head, the latschen-
tufted mound, rock-bastion and defiant cliff and giant
of the triple peak, were in view, clearly lined for
a common recognition, but all were figures of solid
gloom, unfeatured and bloomless. Another minute
and they had flung off their mail and changed to various
indented, intricate, succinct in ridge, scar and channel ;
and they had all a look of watchfulness that made
them one company. The smell of rock-waters and
roots of herb and moss grew keen ; air became a wine
that raised the breast high to breathe it ; an uplifting
coolness pervaded the heights. What wonder that
the mountain-bred girl should let fly her voice. The
natural carol woke an echo. She did not repeat it.
830



GEORGE MEREDITH



' And we will not forget our home, Chillon,' she
said, touching him gently to comfort some saddened
feeling.

The plumes of cloud now slowly entered into the
lofty arch of dawn and melted from brown to purple-
black. The upper sky swam with violet ; and in a
moment each stray cloud-feather was edged with rose,
and then suffused. It seemed that the heights fronted
East to eye the interflooding of colours, and it wa3
imaginable that all turned to the giant whose forehead
first kindled to the sun : a greeting of god and king.
On the morning of a farewell we fluctuate sharply



and even in memory the fluctuation occurs, the
grander scene casting us back on the modestly nestling,
and that, when it has refreshed us, conjuring imagina-
tion to embrace the splendour and wonder. But the
wrench of an immediate division from what we love
makes the things within reach the dearest, we put out
our hands for them, as violently-parted lovers do,
though the soul in days to come would know a craving,
and imagination flap a leaden wing, if we had not
looked beyond them.

' Shall we go down ? ' said Carinthia, for she knew
a little cascade near the house, showering on rock
and fern, and longed to have it round her.

They descended, Chillon saying that they would
soon have the mists rising, and must not delay to start
on their journey.

The armies of the young sunrise in mountain-lands
neighbouring the plains, vast shadows, were marching
over woods and meads, black against the edge of
golden ; and great heights were cut with them, and
bounding waters took the leap in a silvery radiance to



between the very distant




831



GEORGE MEREDITH



gloom ; the bright and dark- banded valleys were like
night and morning taking hands down the sweep of
their rivers. Immense was the range of vision scudding
the peaks and over the illimitable Eastward plains flat
to the very East and sources of the sun.

The Amazing Marriage

DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI

1828-1882

476 Dante's Dream

AT the first, it seemed to me that I saw certain
X\. faces of women with their hair loosened, which
called out to me, ' Thou shalt surely die ' ; after the
which, other terrible and unknown appearances said
unto me, ' Thou art dead.' At length, as my phantasy
held on in its wanderings, I came to be I knew not
where, and to behold a throng of dishevelled ladies
wonderfully sad, who kept going hither and thither
weeping. Then the sun went out, so that the stars
showed themselves, and they were of such a colour
that I knew they must be weeping : and it seemed
to me that the birds fell dead out of the sky, and
that there were great earthquakes. With that, while
I wondered in my trance, and was filled with a grievous
fear, I conceived that a certain friend came unto me
and said : ' Hast thou not heard ? She that was
thine excellent lady hath been taken out of life.'
Then I began to weep very piteously ; and not only
in mine imagination, but with mine eyes, which were
wet with tears. And I seemed to look towards Heaven,
and to behold a multitude of angels who were returning
upwards, having before them an exceedingly white

8}2



DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI



cloud : and these angels were singing together gloriously,
and the words of their song were these : ' Osanna in
excelsis ' ; and there was no more that I heard. Then
my heart that was so full of love said unto me : ' It
is true that our lady lieth dead ' ; and it seemed to
me that I went to look upon the body wherein that
blessed and most noble spirit had had its abiding-
place. And so strong was this idle imagining, that it
made me to behold my lady in death, whose head
certain ladies seemed to be covering with a white veil ;
and who was so humble of her aspect that it was
as though she had said, ' I have attained to look on
the beginning of peace '.

Early Italian Poets

ALEXANDER SMITH

1830-1867

477 T)reamthorp

THE village stands far inland ; and the streams
that trot through the soft green valleys all about
have as little knowledge of the sea, as the three-
years' child of the storms and passions of manhood.
The surrounding country is smooth and green, full
of undulations ; and pleasant country roads strike
through it in every direction, bound for distant towns
and villages, yet in no hurry to reach them. On these
roads the lark in summer is continually heard ; nests
are plentiful in the hedges and dry ditches ; and on
the grassy banks, and at the feet of the bowed dikes,
the blue-eyed speedwell smiles its benison on the
passing wayfarer. On these roads you may walk for
a year and encounter nothing more remarkable than
the country cart, troops of tawny children from the
28^0 E e 833



ALEXANDER SMITH

woods, laden with primroses, and at long intervals —
for people in this district live to a ripe age — a black
funeral creeping in from some remote hamlet ; and
to this last the people reverently doff their hats and
stand aside. Death does not walk about here often,
but when he does, he receives as much respect as the
squire himself. Everything round one is unhurried,
quiet, moss-grown, and orderly. Season follows in
the track of season, and one year can hardly be dis-
tinguished from another. Time should be measured
here by the silent dial, rather than by the ticking
clock, or by the chimes of the church. Dreamthorp
can boast of a respectable antiquity, and in it the trade
of the builder is unknown. Ever since I remember, not
a single stone has been laid on the top of another. . .

The houses are old, and remote dates may yet
be deciphered on the stones above the doors ; the
apple-trees are mossed and ancient ; countless genera-
tions of sparrows have bred in the thatched roofs, and
thereon have chirped out their lives. In every room
of the place men have been born, men have died. On
Dreamthorp centuries have fallen, and have left no
more trace than have last winter's snowflakes. This
commonplace sequence and flowing on of life is
immeasurably affecting. That winter morning when
Charles lost his head in front of the banqueting-hall
of his own palace, the icicles hung from the eaves of
the houses here, and the clown kicked the snowballs
from his clouted shoon, and thought but of his supper
when, at three o'clock, the red sun set in the purple
mist. On that Sunday in June while Waterloo was
going on, the gossips, after morning service, stood on
the country roads discussing agricultural prospects,
without the slightest suspicion that the day passing
834



ALEXANDER SMITH



over their heads would be a famous one in the calendar.
Battles have been fought, kings have died, history
has transacted itself ; but, all unheeding and un-
touched, Dreamthorp has watched apple-trees redden,
and wheat ripen, and smoked its pipe, and quaffed its
mug of beer, and rejoiced over its newborn children,
and with proper solemnity carried its dead to the
churchyard.

Dreamthorp

HENRY KINGSLEY

1830-1876

478 The Children at a Wedding

I WAITED till the procession had gone in, and then
I found that the tail of it was composed of Gus,
Flora, and Archy, with their nurse. If a bachelor is
worth his salt, he will make himself useful. I saw that
nurse was in distress and anxious, so I stayed with her.

Archy was really as good as gold till he met with his
accident. He walked up the steps with nurse as quiet
as possible. But even at first I began to get anxious
about Gus and Flora. They were excited. Gus
wouldn't walk up the steps ; but he put his two heels
together, and jumped up them one at a time, and
Flora walked backwards, looking at him sarcastically.
At the top step but one Gus stumbled ; whereupon
Flora said, ' Goozlemy, goozlemy, goozlemy.'

And Gus said, ' You wait a minute, my lady, till
we get into church,' after which awful speech I felt as
if I was smoking in a powder magazine.

I was put into a pew with Gus, and Flora, and Archy.
Nurse, in her modesty, went into the pew behind us.

I am sorry to say that these dear children, with whom
I had no previous acquaintance, were very naughty.

8 3S



HENRY KINGSLEY



The ceremony began by Archy getting too near the
edge of his hassock, falling off, pitching against the pew
door, bursting it open, and flying out among the free
seats, head foremost. Nurse, a nimble and dexterous
woman, dashed out, and caught him up, and actually
got him out of the church door before he had time
to fetch his breath for a scream. Gus and Flora were
left alone with me.

Flora had a great scarlet and gold church service.
As soon as she opened it, she disconcerted me by saying
aloud, to an imaginary female friend, ' My dear, there
is going to be a collection ; and I have left my purse
on the piano.'

At this time, also, Gus, seeing that the business was
well begun, removed to the further end of the pew,
sat down on the hassock, and took from his trousers'
pocket a large tin trumpet.

I broke out all over in a cold perspiration as I looked
at him. He saw my distress, and putting it to his lips,
puffed out his cheeks. Flora administered comfort
to me. She said, ' You are looking at that foolish boy.
Perhaps he won't blow it, after all. He mayn't if
you don't look at him. At all events, he probably
won't blow it till the organ begins ; and then it won't
matter so much.' . .

I wish those dear children (not meaning them any
harm) had been, to put it mildly, at play on the village
green, that blessed day.

When I looked at Gus again, he was still on the
hassock, threatening propriety with his trumpet.
I hoped for the best. Flora had her prayer-book
open, and was playing the piano on each side of it,
with her fingers. After a time she looked up at me,
and said out loud



836



HENRY KINGSLEY



' I suppose you have heard that Archy's cat has
kittened F '
I said, ' No.'

' Oh, yes, it has,' she said. ' Archy harnessed it to
his meal cart, which turns a mill, and plays music
when the wheels go round ; and it ran downstairs
with the cart ; and we heard the music playing as it
went ; and it kittened in the wood-basket immediately
afterwards ; and Alwright says she don't wonder at
it ; and no more do I ; and the steward's-room boy
is going to drown some. But you mustn't tell Archy,
because, if you do, he won't say his prayers ; and if
he don't say his prayers, he will — etc., etc' Very
emphatically, and in a loud tone of voice.

This was very charming. If I could only answer for
Gus, and keep Flora busy, it was wildly possible that we
might pull through. If I had not been a madman,
I should have noticed that Gus had disappeared.

He had. And the pew door had never opened, and
I was utterly unconscious. Gus had crawled up, on
all fours, under the seat of the pew, until he was
opposite the calves of his sister's legs, against which
calves, horresco referens, he put his trumpet and blew
a long shrill blast. Flora behaved very well and
courageously. She only gave one long, wild shriek, as
from a lunatic in a padded cell at Bedlam, and then,
hurling her prayer-book at him, she turned round and
tried to kick him in the face.

This was the culminating point of my misfortunes.
After this, they behaved better. . . Gus only made
an impertinent remark about Flora's garters, and Flora
only drew a short, but trenchant, historical parallel
between Gus and Judas Iscanot.

Ravenshoe



837



EDWARD LORD MACNAGHTEN



1830-1913

4jg Qjluckstein v. Harries : Pleading

THESE gentlemen set about forming a company
to pay them a handsome sum for taking off their
hands a property which they had contracted to buy
with that end in view. They bring the company into
existence by means of the usual machinery. They
appoint themselves sole guardians and protectors of
this creature of theirs, half-fledged and just struggling
into life, bound hand and foot while yet unborn by
contracts tending to their private advantage, and so
fashioned by its makers that it could only act by their
hands and only see through their eyes. They issue
a prospectus representing that they had agreed to
purchase the property for a sum largely in excess of
the amount which they had, in fact, to pay. On the
faith of this prospectus they collect subscriptions from
a confiding and credulous public. And then comes
the last act. Secretly, and therefore dishonestly, they
put into their own pockets the difference between the
real and the pretended price. After a brief career
the company is ordered to be wound up. In the course
of the liquidation the trick is discovered. Mr. Gluck-
stein is called upon to make good a portion of the sum
which he and his associates had misappropriated. Why
Mr. Gluckstein alone was selected for attack I do not
know any more than I know why he was only asked
to pay back a fraction of the money improperly with-
drawn from the coffers of the company. . . In these
two matters Mr. Gluckstein has been in my opinion
extremely fortunate. But he complains that he may
have a difficulty in recovering from his co-directors
838



LORD MACNAGHTEN



their share of the spoil, and he asks that the official
liquidator may proceed against his associates before
calling upon him to make good the whole amount
with which he has been charged. My Lords, there
may be occasions in which that would be a proper
course to take. But I cannot think that this is a case
in which any indulgence ought to be shown to
Mr. Gluckstein. He may or may not be able to
recover a contribution from those who joined with
him in defrauding the company. He can bring an
action at law if he likes. If he hesitates to take that
course or takes it and fails, then his only remedy lies
in an appeal to that sense of honour which is popularly
supposed to exist among robbers of a humbler type.

Law Reports

MARK RUTHERFORD
(WILLIAM HALE WHITE)

1831 -1913

480 Injustice

A NOTION, self-begotten in me, of the limitations
of my friend is answerable for the barrenness of
my intercourse with him. I set him down as hard ;
I speak to him as if he were hard and from that which
is hard in myself. Naturally I evoke only that which
is hard, although there may be fountains of tenderness
in him of which I am altogether unaware. It is far
better in conversation not to regulate it according to
supposed capacities or tempers, which are generally
those of some fictitious being, but to be simply our-
selves. We shall often find unexpected and welcome
response.

839



MARK RUTHERFORD



Our estimates of persons, unless they are frequently
revived by personal intercourse, are apt to alter insen-
sibly and to become untrue. They acquire increased
definiteness but they lose in comprehensiveness.

Especially is this true of those who are dead. If
I do not read a great author for some time my mental
abstract of him becomes summary and false. I turn
to him again, all summary judgments upon him
become impossible, and he partakes of infinitude.
Writers, and people who are in society and talk much
are apt to be satisfied with an algebraic symbol for
a man of note, and their work is done not with him
but with x.

Pages from a Journal

481 &sf Londoner's Holiday

ONE Sunday we determined upon a holiday. It
was a bold adventure for us, but we had made
up our minds. There was an excursion train to Hast-
ings, and accordingly Ellen, Marie, and myself were
at London Bridge Station early in the morning. It
was a lovely summer's day in mid-July. The journey
down was uncomfortable enough in consequence of the
heat and dust, but we heeded neither one nor the other
in the hope of seeing the sea. We reached Hastings
at about eleven o'clock, and strolled westwards towards
Bexhill. Our pleasure was exquisite. Who can tell,
save the imprisoned Londoner, the joy of walking on
the clean sea-sand ! What a delight that was, to say
nothing of the beauty of the scenery ! To be free of
the litter and filth of a London suburb, of its broken
hedges, its brickbats, its torn advertisements, its worn
and trampled grass in fields half given over to the
840



MARK RUTHERFORD

speculative builder : in place of this, to tread the
immaculate shore over which breathed a wind not
charged with soot ; to replace the dull, shrouding
obscurity of the smoke by a distance so distinct that
the masts of the ships whose hulls were buried below
the horizon were visible — all this was perfect bliss. It
was not very poetic bliss, perhaps ; but nevertheless
it is a fact that the cleanness of the sea and the sea
air was as attractive to us as any of the sea attributes.
We had a wonderful time. Only in the country is it
possible to note the change of morning into mid-day,
of mid-day into afternoon, and of afternoon into
evening ; and it is only in the country, therefore, that
a day seems stretched out into its proper length. We
had brought all our food with us, and sat upon the shore
in the shadow of a piece of the cliff. A row of heavy
white clouds lay along the horizon almost unchangeable
and immovable, with their summit-lines and the part
of the mass just below them steeped in sunlight. The
level opaline water differed only from a floor by a
scarcely perceptible heaving motion, which broke into
the faintest of ripples at our feet. So still was the
great ocean, so quietly did everything lie in it, that
the wavelets which licked the beach were as pure and
bright as if they were a part of the mid-ocean depths.
About a mile from us, at one o'clock, a long row of
porpoises appeared, showing themselves in graceful
curves for half-an-hour or so, till they went out farther
to sea off Fairlight. Some fishing-boats were becalmed
just in front of us. Their shadows slept, or almost
slept, upon the water, a gentle quivering alone showing
that it was not complete sleep, or if sleep, that it was
sleep with dreams. The intensity of the sunlight
sharpened the outlines of every little piece of rock,

841



MARK RUTHERFORD



and of the pebbles, in a manner which seemed super-
natural to us Londoners. In London we get the heat
of the sun, but not his light, and the separation of
individual parts into such vivid isolation was so sur-
prising that even Marie noticed it, and said it ' all
seemed as if she were looking through a glass '. It was
perfect — perfect in its beauty — and perfect because,
from the sun in the heavens down to the fly with
burnished wings on the hot rock, there was nothing
out of harmony. Everything breathed one spirit.
Marie played near us ; Ellen and I sat still, doing
nothing. We wanted nothing, we had nothing to
achieve ; there were no curiosities to be seen, there was
no particular place to be reached, no ' plan of opera-
tions ', and London was forgotten for the time. It
lay behind us in the north-west, and the cliff was at
the back of us shutting out all thought of it. No
reminiscences and no anticipations disturbed us ; the
present was sufficient, and occupied us totally.

Mark Rutherford's Deliverance

LEONARD LORD COURTNEY OF
PENWITH

1832-1918

482 Justice

IF we could get rid of injustice ! How shall we labour
to bring about that great result? How shall we
get the rulers of nations to cease to aspire to obtain
power over others ; how shall we get the members of
nations to be just to one another, so that they shall
not even tolerate the thought of wrong-doing ? How
shall we get amongst the nations what we have suc-
842



LORD COURTNEY

ceeded in obtaining within nations — a reference to law
instead of to force, an appeal to the privileges and
powers of society for enforcing justice, instead of a
resort on one's own account to the force which one
may command to compel justice ? How, I say, can we
hope to bring about this great result i

After all, the machinery of justice involves this
fundamental notion, that when two persons are in
disagreement there is a tribunal to which they can
appeal. In a perfect form that tribunal is always in
action, and each of the litigants can compel the other
to come before it. Then you have established a law
which does away with private violence, and if you got
that among the nations you would have a law that
did away with national violence.

The first thing to which I would direct your
attention is to use all your powers, all your opportuni-
ties to develop the strength, the scope, the purity of
international law. Do as much as you can as individuals,
influence your rulers as much as you can as citizens of
free communities, to develop, strengthen, and purify
international law — international law which rises above
the separate nations, just as the municipal law of
a community rises above its separate citizens.

The temptation to lust and rapine of unchecked
human nature is under coercion in every society ; and
lovers of the larger civilization of the world must
rejoice in the restraint of temptation which is found
in compacts of international peace.

Without justice we can have no guarantee of per-
manent peace. With justice the peace of the world is
unassailable.

Addresses 1908-1909



843



JOSEPH HENRY SHORTHOUSE

1834-1903

483 The 'Pavilion in the Wood

PRESENTLY, in the brilliant moonlight, they saw
the pointed roofs of the pavilion on a little rising-
ground, with the forest trees coming up closely to the
walls. The moon was now high in the heavens, and
it was as light as day. The upper windows of the
pavilion were open, and within it lights were burning.
The door was opened to them before they knocked,
and the keeper of the pavilion came to meet them,
accompanied by a boy who took the horses. The man
showed no surprise at their coming, only saying some
servants of the Duchess had been there a few hours
previously, and had prepared a repast in the dining-
room, forewarning him that he should expect visitors.
He accompanied them upstairs, for they saw nothing
of the other inmates of the place. The rooms were
arranged with a sort of rustic luxury, and were
evidently intended for repose during the heat of the
day. A plentiful and delicate collation was spread on
one of the tables, with abundance of fruit and wine.
The place looked like the magic creation of an
enchanter's wand, raised for purposes of evil from the
unhealthy marsh, and ready to sink again, when that
malefic purpose was fulfilled, into the weird depths
from which it rose.

The old man showed them the other rooms of the
apartment, and left them. At the door he turned back
and said, —

' I should not advise the lady to sleep here ; the
miasma from the forest is very fatal to such as are not
used to it.'
844



JOSEPH HENRY SHORTHOUSE

Inglesant looked at him, but could not perceive
that he intended his word to have any deeper meaning
than the obvious one. He said, —

' We shall stay only an hour or two ; let the horses
be ready to go on.'

The man left them, and they sat down at the table.
. . The night air was heavy and close, not a breath of
wind stirred the lights, though every window was
thrown open, and the shutters that closed the loggia
outside were drawn back. In the brilliant moonlight
every leaf of the great forest shone with an unnatural
distinctness, which, set in a perfect silence, became
terrible to see. The sylvan arcades seemed like a
painted scene-piece upon a Satanic stage, super-
naturally alight to further deeds of sin, and silent
and unpeopled, lest the wrong should be interrupted
or checked. . . The two found their eyes drawn with a
kind of fascination to this strange sight, and Inglesant
arose and closed the shutters before the nearest
casement.

They felt more at ease when the mysterious forest
was shut out. But Lauretta was silent and troubled,
and Inglesant's efforts to cheer and enliven her were
not successful. . . At last she refused to drink, and
rising up suddenly, she exclaimed, —

' Oh, it is terribly hot. I cannot bear it. I wish
we had not come.'

She wandered from the room in which they sat,
through the curtained doorway into the next, which
was furnished with couches, and sank down on one of
them. Inglesant followed her, and, as if the heat felt
stifling also to him, went out upon the open verandah...

He gazed another moment over the illumined
forest, which seemed transfigured in the moonlight

845



JOSEPH HENRY SHORTHOUSE

and the stillness into an unreal landscape of the dead.
The poisonous mists crept over the tops of the cork
trees, and flitted across the long vistas in spectral
forms, cowled and shrouded for the grave. Beneath
the gloom indistinct figures seemed to glide, — the per-
sonation of the miasma that made the place so fatal
to human life.

He turned to enter the room, but even as he turned
a sudden change came over the scene. The deadly
glamour of the moonlight faded suddenly, a calm pale
solemn light settled over the forest, the distant line
of hills shone out distinct and clear, the evil mystery
of the place departed whence it came, a fresh and
cooling breeze sprang up and passed through the
rustling wood, breathing pureness and life. The
dayspring was at hand in the eastern sky.

The rustling breeze was like a whisper from heaven
that reminded him of his better self. It would seem
that hell overdid it ; the very stillness for miles
around, the almost concerted plan, sent flashing
through his brain the remembrance of another house,
equally guarded for a like purpose — a house at Newn-
ham near Oxford, into which years ago he had himself
forced his way to render help in such a case as this.
Here was the same thing happening over again with
the actors changed ; was it possible that such a
change had been wrought in him? The long past
life of those days rushed into his mind ; the sacra-
mental Sundays, the repeated vows, the light of
heaven in the soul, the kneeling forms in Little
Gidding Chapel, the face of Mary Collet, the loveli-
ness that blessed the earth where she walked, her
deathbed, and her dying words. What so rarely
happens happened here. The revulsion of feeling, the
846



JOSEPH HENRY SHORTHOUSE



rush of recollection and association, was too powerful
for the flesh. . . But the struggle was fierce ; he was
torn like the demon-haunted child in the gospel story ;
but, as in that story, the demon was expelled.

He came back into the room. Lauretta lay upon
a couch with rich drapery and cushions. . . As he
entered she raised her head from her hands, and
looked at him with a strange, apprehensive, expectant
gaze. He remained for a moment silent, his face very
pale ; then he said, slowly and uncertainly, like a man
speaking in a dream, —

' The fatal miasma is rising from the plain. Lauretta,
this place is safe for neither of us, we had better go on.'

John lnglesant

WILLIAM MORRIS

1834-1896

484 J^elmscott

IN a few minutes we had passed through a deep
eddying pool into the sharp stream that ran from
the ford, and beached our craft on a tiny strand of
limestone-gravel, and stepped ashore into the arms
of our up-river friends, our journey done.

I disentangled myself from the merry throng, and
mounting on the cart-road that ran along the river
some feet above the water, I looked round about me.
The river came down through a wide meadow on my
left, which was grey now with the ripened seeding
grasses ; the gleaming water was lost presently by
a turn of the bank, but over the meadow I could see
the mingled gables of a building where I knew the
lock must be, and which now seemed to combine a mill
with it. A low wooded ridge bounded the river-plain

847



WILLIAM MORRIS



to the south and south-east, whence we had come,
and a few low houses lay about its feet and up its
slope. I turned a little to my right, and through the
hawthorn sprays and long shoots of the wild roses
could see the flat country spreading out far away under
the sun of the calm evening, till something that might
be called hills with a look of sheep-pastures about them
bounded it with a soft blue line. Before me, the elm-
boughs still hid most of what houses there might be
in this river-side dwelling of men, but to the right
of the cart-road a few grey buildings of the simplest
kind showed here and there.

There I stood in a dreamy mood, and rubbed my
eyes as if I were not wholly awake, and half expected
to see the gay-clad company of beautiful men and
women change to two or three spindle-legged back-
bowed men, and haggard, hollow-eyed, ill-favoured
women, who once wore down the soil of this land with
their heavy hopeless feet, from day to day, and season
to season, and year to year. But no change came as
yet, and my heart swelled with joy as I thought of
all the beautiful grey villages from the river to the
plain and the plain to the uplands, which I could
picture to myself so well, all peopled now with this
happy and lovely folk, who had cast away riches and
attained to wealth. As I stood there Ellen detached her-
self from our happy friends who still stood on the little
strand and came up to me. She took me by the hand,
and said softly, ' Take me on to the house at once ;
we need not wait for the others : I had rather not.'

I had a mind to say that I did not know the way
thither, and that the river-side dwellers should lead ;
but almost without my will my feet moved on along
the road they knew. The raised way led us into a
848



WILLIAM MORRIS

little field bounded by a backwater of the river on
one side ; on the right hand we could see a cluster
of small houses and barns, new and old, and before
us a grey stone barn and a wall partly overgrown with
ivy, over which a few grey gables showed. The village
road ended in the shallow of the aforesaid backwater.
We crossed the road, and again almost without my
will my hand raised the latch of a door in the wall,
and we stood presently on a stone path which led up
to the old house to which fate in the shape of Dick had
so strangely brought me in this new world of men. My
companion gave a sigh of pleased surprise and enjoyment ;
nor did I wonder, for the garden between the wall and
the house was redolent of the June flowers, and the
roses were rolling over one another with that delicious
superabundance of small well-tended gardens which
at first sight takes away all thought from the beholder
save that of beauty. The blackbirds were singing
their loudest, the doves were cooing on the roof-ridge,
the rooks in the high elm-trees beyond were garrulous
among the young leaves, and the swifts wheeled
whining about the gables. And the house itself was
a fit guardian for all the beauty of this heart of summer.

News from Nowhere

JAMES ABBOTT McNEILL
WHISTLER

1834-1903

485 Mature and <^rt

NATURE contains the elements, in colour and
form, of all pictures, as the keyboard contains
the notes of all music.

But the artist is born to pick, and choose, and group

849



JAMES ABBOTT McNEILL WHISTLER



with science, these elements, that the result may be
beautiful — as the musician gathers his notes, and
forms his chords, until he bring forth from chaos
glorious harmony.

To say to the painter, that Nature is to be taken as
she is, is to say to the player, that he may sit on the
piano. . .

The dignity of the snow-capped mountain is lost
in distinctness, but the joy of the tourist is to recognize
the traveller on the top. The desire to see, for the
sake of seeing, is, with the mass, alone the one to be
gratified, hence the delight in detail.

And when the evening mist clothes the riverside
with poetry, as with a veil, and the poor buildings
lose themselves in the dim sky, and the tall chimneys
become campanili, and the warehouses are palaces in
the night, and the whole city hangs in the heavens, and
fairy-land is before us — then the wayfarer hastens
home ; the working man and the cultured one, the
wise man and the one of pleasure, cease to understand,
as they have ceased to see, and Nature, who, for once,
has sung in tune, sings her exquisite song to the artist
alone, her son and her master — her son in that he loves
her, her master in that he knows her.

To him her secrets are unfolded, to him her lessons
have become gradually clear. He looks at her flower,
not with the enlarging lens, that he may gather facts
for the botanist, but with the light of the one who
sees in her choice selection of brilliant tones and
delicate tints, suggestions of future harmonies.

He does not confine himself to purposeless copying,
without thought, each blade of grass, as commended
by the inconsequent, but, in the long curve of the
narrow leaf, corrected by the straight tall stem, he
850



JAMES ABBOTT McNEILL WHISTLER



learns how grace is wedded to dignity, how strength
enhances sweetness, that elegance shall be the result.

In the citron wing of the pale butterfly, with its
dainty spots of orange, he sees before him the stately
halls of fair gold, with their slender saffron pillars, and
is taught how the delicate drawing high upon the
walls shall be traced in tender tones of orpiment,
and repeated by the base in notes of graver hue.

In all that is dainty and lovable he finds hints for
his own combinations, and thus is Nature ever his
resource and always at his service, and to him is naught
refused.

Through his brain, as through the last alembic, is
distilled the refined essence of that thought which
began with the Gods, and which they left him to carry
out.

Set apart by them to complete their works, he
produces that wondrous thing called the masterpiece,
which surpasses in perfection all that they have con-
trived in what is called Nature ; and the Gods stand
by and marvel, and perceive how far away more beau-
tiful is the Venus of Melos than was their own Eve.

The Gentle Art of Making Enemies

WILLIAM STANLEY JEVONS

183S-1882

486 True Science

FROM science, modestly pursued, with a due
consciousness of the extreme finitude of our
intellectual powers, there can arise only nobler and
wider notions of the purpose of Creation. Our
philosophy will be an affirmative one, not the false and

851



WILLIAM STANLEY JEVONS

negative dogmas of Auguste Comte, which have usurped
the name, and misrepresented the tendencies of a true
positive philosophy. True science will not deny the
existence of things because they cannot be weighed
and measured. It will rather lead us to believe that
the wonders and subtleties of possible existence sur-
pass all that our mental powers allow us clearly to
perceive. The study of logical and mathematical
forms has convinced me that even space itself is no
requisite condition of conceivable existence. Every-
thing, we are told by materialists, must be here or
there, nearer or further, before or after. I deny this —
and point to logical relations as my proof.

. . So far am I from accepting Kant's doctrine that
space is a necessary form of thought, that I regard it
as an accident, and an impediment to pure logical
reasoning. Material existences must exist in space,
no doubt, but intellectual existences may be neither
in space nor out of space j they may have no relation to
space at all, just as space itself has no relation to time.
For all that I can see, then, there may be intellectual
existences to which both time and space are nullities.

Now among the most unquestionable rules of
scientific method is that first law that whatever
phenomenon is, is. We must ignore no existence
whatever ; we may variously interpret or explain its
meaning and origin, but, if a phenomenon does exist,
it demands some kind of explanation. If then there is
to be competition for scientific recognition, the
world without us must yield to the undoubted
existence of the spirit within. Our own hopes and
wishes and determinations are the most undoubted
phenomena within the sphere of consciousness. If
men do act, feel, and live as if they were not merely
852



WILLIAM STANLEY JEVONS

the brief products of a casual conjunction of atoms,
but the instruments of a far-reaching purpose, are we
to record all other phenomena and pass over these?
We investigate the instincts of the ant and the bee
and the beaver, and discover that they are led by an
inscrutable agency to work towards a distant purpose.
Let us be faithful to our scientific method, and
investigate also those instincts of the human mind
by which man is led to work as if the approval of a
Higher Being were the aim of life.

The Principles of Science

CHARLES SYNGE CHRISTOPHER
LORD JUSTICE BOWEN

1835-1894

487 £Mogul Steamship Qompany v.
£Mc(jregor (jow & Qo. : Judgement

WE were told that competition ceases to be the
lawful exercise of trade, and so to be a lawful
excuse for what will harm another, if carried to a length
which is not fair or reasonable. The offering of reduced
rates by the defendants in the present case is said to
have been ' unfair '. This seems to assume that, apart
from fraud, intimidation, molestation, or obstruction,
of some other personal right in rem or in personam,
there is some natural standard of ' fairness ' or ' reason-
ableness ' (to be determined by the internal conscious-
ness of judges and juries) beyond which competition
ought not in law to go. There seems to be no
authority, and I think, with submission, that there is
no sufficient reason for such a proposition. It would
impose a novel fetter upon trade. The defendants,

853



LORD JUSTICE BOWEN

we are told by the plaintiffs' counsel, might lawfully
lower rates provided they did not lower them beyond
a ' fair freight whatever that may mean. But where
is it established that there is any such restriction upon
commerce f And what is to be the definition of
a ' fair freight ' f It is said that it ought to be a normal
rate of freight, such as is reasonably remunerative to
the shipowner. But over what period of time is the
average of this reasonable remunerativeness to be
calculated f All commercial men with capital are
acquainted with the ordinary expedient of sowing one
year a crop of apparently unfruitful prices, in order
by driving competition away to reap a fuller harvest
of profit in the future ; and until the present argu-
ment at the bar it may be doubted whether ship-
owners or merchants were ever deemed to be bound
by law to conform to some imaginary ' normal '
standard of freights or prices, or that Law Courts had
a right to say to them in respect of their competitive
tariffs, 4 Thus far shalt thou go and no further '. To
attempt to limit English competition in this way
would probably be as hopeless an endeavour as the
experiment of King Canute.

Law Reports

WILLIAM EDWARD HALL

1835-1894

488 aA Prophecy

IOOKING back over the last couple of centuries we
j see International Law at the close of each fifty
years in a more solid position than that which it
occupied at the beginning of the period. Progressively
854



WILLIAM EDWARD HALL

it has taken firmer hold, it has extended its sphere of
operation, it has ceased to trouble itself about trivial
formalities, it has more and more dared to grapple in
detail with the fundamental facts in the relations of
states. The area within which it reigns beyond dis-
pute has in that time been infinitely enlarged, and it
has been greatly enlarged within the memory of living
men. But it would be idle to pretend that this
progress has gone on without check. In times when
wars have been both long and bitter, in moments of
revolutionary passion, on occasions when temptation
and opportunity of selfishness on the part of neutrals
have been great, men have fallen back into disregard
of law and even into true lawlessness. And it would
be idle also to pretend that Europe is not now in great
likelihood moving towards a time at which the strength
of International Law will be too hardly tried. Prob-
ably in the next great war the questions which have
accumulated during the last half-century and more,
will all be given their answers at once. Some hates
moreover will crave for satisfaction ; much envy and
greed will be at work ; but above all, and at the bottom
of all, there will be the hard sense of necessity. Whole
nations will be in the field ; the commerce of the
world may be on the sea to win or lose ; national
existences will be at stake ; men will be tempted to
do anything which will shorten hostilities and tend to
a decisive issue. Conduct in the next great war will
certainly be hard ; it is very doubtful if it will be
scrupulous, whether on the part of belligerents or
neutrals ; and most likely the next war will be great.
But there can be very little doubt that if the next war
is unscrupulously waged, it also will be followed by
a reaction towards increased stringency of law. In

8 5S



WILLIAM EDWARD HALL



a community, as in an individual, passionate excess is
followed by a reaction of lassitude and to some extent
of conscience. On the whole the collective seems to
exert itself in this way more surely than the individual
conscience ; and in things within the scope of Inter-
national Law, conscience, if it works less impulsively,
can at least work more freely than in home affairs.
Continuing temptation ceases with the war. At any
rate it is a matter of experience that times, in which
International Law has been seriously disregarded, have
been followed by periods in which the European
conscience has done penance by putting itself under
straiter obligations than those which it before acknow-
ledged. There is no reason to suppose that things
will be otherwise in the future. I therefore look
forward with much misgiving to the manner in which
the next great war will be waged, but with no misgiving
at all as to the character of the rules which will be
acknowledged ten years after its termination, by com-
parison with the rules now considered to exist.

Preface to the Third Edttton of International Law



SAMUEL BUTLER

1835-1902

489 The Turtle

WALKING the other day in Cheapside I saw
some turtles in Mr. Sweeting's window, and was
tempted to stay and look at them. As I did so I was
struck not more by the defences with which they were
hedged about, than by the fatuousness of trying to
hedge that in at all which, if hedged thoroughly, must
die of its own defencefulness. The holes for the head
856



SAMUEL BUTLER



and feet through which the turtle leaks out, as it were,
on to the exterior world, and through which it again
absorbs the exterior world into itself — ' catching on '
through them to things that are thus both turtle and
not turtle at one and the same time — these holes
stultify the armour, and show it to have been designed
by a creature with more of faithfulness to a fixed idea,
and hence onesidedness, than of that quick sense of
relative importances and their changes, which is the
main factor of good living.

The turtle obviously had no sense of proportion ;
it differed so widely from myself that I could not
comprehend it ; and as this word occurred to me, it
occurred also that until my body comprehended its
body in a physical material sense, neither would my
mind be able to comprehend its mind with any
thoroughness. For unity of mind can only be con-
summated by unity of body ; everything, therefore,
must be in some respects both knave and fool to all
that which has not eaten it, or by which it has not
been eaten. As long as the turtle was in the window
and I in the street outside, there was no chance of
our comprehending one another.

Nevertheless, I knew that I could get it to agree
with me if I could so effectually buttonhole and fasten
on to it as to eat it. Most men have an easy method
with turtle soup, and I had no misgiving but that if
I could bring my first premise to bear I should prove
the better reasoner. My difficulty lay in this initial
process, for I had not with me the argument that
would alone compel Mr. Sweeting to think that I ought
to be allowed to convert the turtles — I mean I had no
money in my pocket. No missionary enterprise can
be carried on without any money at all, but even so

857



SAMUEL BUTLER



small a sum as half a crown would, I suppose, have
enabled me to bring the turtle partly round, and with
many half-crowns I could in time no doubt convert
the iot, for the turtle needs must go where the money
drives. If, as is alleged, the world stands on a turtle,
the turtle stands on money. No money no turtle.

Rambhngs m Cheapside

490 The Statues

I PASSED along the western side of the lake, where
the ground was easier, and when I had got about
half way I expected that I should see the plains which
I had already seen from the opposite mountains ; but
it was not to be so, for the clouds rolled up to the
very summit of the pass, though they did not overlip
it on to the side from which I had come. I therefore
soon found myself enshrouded by a cold thin vapour,
which prevented me seeing more than a very few yards
in front of me. Then I came upon a large patch of
old snow, in which I could distinctly trace the half-
melted tracks of goats — and in one place, as it seemed
to me, there had been a dog following them. Had
I lighted upon a land of shepherds ? The ground,
where not covered with snow, was so poor and stony,
and there was so little herbage, that I could see no
sign of a path or regular sheep-track. But I could
not help feeling rather uneasy as I wondered what sort
of a reception I might meet with if I were to come
suddenly upon inhabitants. I was thinking of this,
and proceeding cautiously through the mist, when
I began to fancy that I saw some objects darker than
the cloud looming in front of me. A few steps brought
me nearer, and a shudder of unutterable horror ran
858



SAMUEL BUTLER



through me when I saw a circle of gigantic forms,
many times higher than myself, upstanding grim and
grey through the veil of cloud before me.

I suppose I must have fainted, for I found myself
some time afterwards sitting upon the ground, sick
and deadly cold. There were the figures, quite still
and silent, seen vaguely through the thick gloom, but
in human shape indisputably.

A sudden thought occurred to me, which would
have doubtless struck me at once had I not been pre-
possessed with forebodings at the time that I first saw
the figures, and had not the cloud concealed them
from me — I mean that they were not living beings,
but statues. I determined that I would count fifty
slowly, and was sure that the objects were not alive
if during that time I could detect no sign of motion.

How thankful was I when I came to the end of my
fifty and there had been no movement !

I counted a second time — but again all was still.

I then advanced timidly forward, and in another
moment I saw that my surmise was correct. I had
come upon a sort of Stonehenge of rude and barbaric
figures, seated as Chowbok had sat when I questioned
him in the wool-shed, and with the same superhumanly
malevolent expression upon their faces. They had
been all seated, but two had fallen. They were bar-
barous — neither Egyptian, nor Assyrian, nor Japanese
— different from any of these, and yet akin to all.
They were six or seven times larger than life, of great
antiquity, worn and lichen grown. They were ten
in number. There was snow upon their heads and
wherever snow could lodge. Each statue had been
built of four or five enormous blocks, but how these
had been raised and put together is known to those

859



SAMUEL BUTLER

alone who raised them. Each was terrible after a
different kind. One was raging furiously, as in pain
and great despair ; another was lean and cadaverous
with famine ; another cruel and idiotic, but with the
silliest simper that can be conceived — this one had
fallen, and looked exquisitely ludicrous in his fall — the
mouths of all were more or less open, and as I looked
at them from behind, I saw that their heads had been
hollowed. . .

Then came a gust of howling wind, accompanied
with a moan from one of the statues above me.
I clasped my hands in fear. I felt like a rat caught
in a trap, as though I would have turned and bitten
at whatever thing was nearest me. The wildness of
the wind increased, the moans grew shriller, coming
from several statues, and swelling into a chorus. I
almost immediately knew what it was, but the sound
was so unearthly that this was but little consolation.
The inhuman beings into whose hearts the Evil One
had put it to conceive these statues, had made their
heads into a sort of organ-pipe, so that their mouths
should catch the wind and sound with its blowing.
It was horrible. However brave a man might be, he
could never stand such a concert, from such lips, and
in such a place. I heaped every invective upon them
that my tongue could utter as I rushed away from
them into the mist, and even after I had lost sight of
them, and turning my head round could see nothing
but the storm-wraiths driving behind me, I heard
their ghostly chanting, and felt as though one of them
would rush after me and grip me in his hand and
throttle me.

Erewhon



860



JOHN RICHARD GREEN

1837-1883

4gi The Universities and Feudalism

THE feudal and ecclesiastical order of the old
mediaeval world were both alike threatened by
the power that had so strangely sprung up in the midst
of them. Feudalism rested on local isolation, on the
severance of kingdom from kingdom and barony from
barony, on the distinction of blood and race, on the
supremacy of material or brute force, on an allegiance
determined by accidents of place and social position.
The University, on the other hand, was a protest
against this isolation of man from man. The smallest
school was European and not local. Not merely every
province of France, bu<- every people of Christendom,
had its place among the ' nations ' of Paris or Padua.
A common language, the Latin tongue, superseded
within academical bounds the warring tongues of
Europe. A common intellectual kinship and rivalry
took the place of the petty strifes which parted province
from province or realm from realm. What the Church
and Empire had both aimed at and both failed in, the
knitting of Christian nations together into a vast
commonwealth, the Universities for a time actually
did. Dante felt himself as little a stranger in the
' Latin ' quarter around Mont Ste Genevieve as
under the arches of Bologna. Wandering Oxford
scholars carried the writings of Wyclif to the libraries
of Prague. In England the work of provincial fusion
was less difficult or important than elsewhere, but
even in England work had to be done. The feuds
of Northerner and Southerner which so long disturbed
the discipline of Oxford witnessed at any rate to

861



JOHN RICHARD GREEN

the fact that Northerner and Southerner had at last
been brought face to face in its streets. And here
as elsewhere the spirit of national isolation was held
in check by the larger comprehensiveness of the
University. After the dissensions that threatened the
prosperity of Paris in the thirteenth century, Norman
and Gascon mingled with Englishmen in Oxford
lecture-halls. At a later time the rebellion of Owen
Glyndwr found hundreds of Welshmen gathered
round its teachers. And within this strangely mingled
mass, society and government rested on a purely
democratic basis. Among Oxford scholars the son of
the noble stood on precisely the same footing with
the poorest mendicant. Wealth, physical strength,
skill in arms, pride of ancestry and blood, the very
grounds on which feudal society rested, went for
nothing in the lecture-room. The University was
a state absolutely self-governed, and whose citizens
were admitted by a purely intellectual franchise.
Knowledge made the ' master '. To know more than
one's fellows was a man's sole claim to be a ' ruler '
in the schools : and within this intellectual aristocracy
all were equal. When the free commonwealth of
the masters gathered in the aisles of S. Mary's all had
an equal right to counsel, all had an equal vote in
the final decision. Treasury and library were at their
complete disposal. It was their voice that named
every officer, that proposed and sanctioned every
statute. Even the Chancellor, their head, who had
at first been an officer of the Bishop, became an
elected officer of their own.

Short History of the English People



862



ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE

1837-1909

492 Thilip the Bastard

FAR beyond the reach of any but his maker's hand
is the pattern of a perfect English warrior, set
once for all before the eyes of all ages in the figure of
the noble Bastard. The national side of Shakespeare's
genius, the heroic vein of patriotism that runs like
a thread of living fire through the world-wide range of
his omnipresent spirit, has never, to my thinking,
found vent or expression to such glorious purpose as
here. Not even in Hotspur or Prince Hal has he mixed
with more godlike sleight of hand all the lighter and
graver good qualities of the national character, or
compounded of them all so lovable a nature as this.
In those others we admire and enjoy the same bright
fiery temper of soul, the same buoyant and fearless
mastery of fate or fortune, the same gladness and glory
of life made lovely with all the labour and laughter of
its full fresh days ; but no quality of theirs binds our
hearts to them as they are bound to Philip — not by
his loyal valour, his keen young wit, his kindliness,
constancy, readiness of service as swift and sure in
the day of his master's bitterest shame and shame-
fullest trouble as in the blithest hour of battle and that
first good fight which won back his father's spoils
from his father's slayer ; but more than all these, for
that lightning of divine rage and pity, of tenderness
that speaks in thunder and indignation that makes fire
of its tears, in the horror of great compassion which
falls on him, the tempest and storm of a beautiful
and godlike anger which shakes his strength of spirit
and bows his high heart down at sight of Arthur dead.

A Study of Shakespeare
863



ALGERNON CHARLES SWINBURNE



493 'Byron

HIS work was done at Missolonghi ; all of his work
for which the fates could spare him time. A
little space was allowed him to show at least a heroic
purpose, and attest a high design ; then, with all
things unfinished before him and behind, he fell
asleep after many troubles and triumphs. Few can
ever have gone wearier to the grave ; none with less
fear. He had done enough to earn his rest. Forgetful
now and set free for ever from all faults and foes, he
passed through the doorway of no ignoble death out
of reach of time, out of sight of love, out of hearing
of hatred, beyond the blame of England and the praise
of Greece. In the full strength of spiiit and of body
his destiny overtook him, and made an end of all
his labours. He had seen and borne and achieved
more than most men on record. ' He was a great man,
good at many things, and now he has attained this
also, to be at rest.'

Introduction to a Selection from the Works of Lord Byron

WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE
LECKY

1838-1903

494 Party Votes

A MEMBER of Parliament must often feel himself
in the position of a private in an army, or a
player in a game, or an advocate in a law case. On
many questions each party represents and defends the
special interests of some particular classes in the
country. When there are two plausible alternative
courses to be pursued which divide public opinion, the
864



WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY



Opposition is almost bound by its position to enforce
the merits of the course opposed to that adopted by
the Government. In theory nothing could seem more
absurd than a system of government in which, as it has
been said, the ablest men in Parliament are divided
into two classes, one side being charged with the duty
of carrying on the government and the other with that
of obstructing and opposing them in their task, and in
which, on a vast multitude of unconnected questions,
these two great bodies of very competent men, with
the same facts and arguments before them, habitually
go Into opposite lobbies. In practice, however, parlia-
mentary government by great parties, in countries
where it is fully understood and practised, is found
to be admirably efficacious in representing every
variety of political opinion ; in securing a constant
supervision and criticism of men and measures ; and
in forming a safety valve through which the dangerous
humours of society can expand without evil to the
community.

This, however, is only accomplished by constant
compromises which are seldom successfully carried out
without a long national experience. Party must exist.
It must be maintained as an essential condition of
good government, but it must be subordinated to the
public interests, and in the public interests it must be
in many cases suspended. There are subjects which
cannot be introduced without the gravest danger into
the arena of party controversy. Indian politics are
a conspicuous example, and, although foreign policy
cannot be kept wholly outside it, the dangers con-
nected with its party treatment are extremely great.
Many measures of a different kind are conducted with
the concurrence of the two front benches. A cordial
2830 f f 865



WILLIAM EDWARD HARTPOLE LECKY



union on large classes of questions between the heads
of the rival parties is one of the first conditions of
successful parliamentary government. The Opposition
leader must have a voice in the conduct of business,
on the questions that should be brought forward, and
on the questions that it is for the public interest to
keep back. He is the official leader of systematic,
organised opposition to the Government, yet he is
on a large number of questions their most powerful
ally. He must frequently have confidential relations
with them, and one of his most useful functions is to
prevent sections of his party from endeavouring to
snatch party advantages by courses which might
endanger public interests. If the country is to be
well governed there must be a large amount of con-
tinuity in its policy ; certain conditions and principles
of administration must be inflexibly maintained, and
in great national emergencies all parties must unite.

The Map of Ltfe



JOHN VISCOUNT MORLEY
OF BLACKBURN

1838-1923

495 Eighteenth- Qentury Verse

TO find beautiful and pathetic language, set to
harmonious numbers, for the common impressions
of meditative minds, is no small part of the poet's task.
That part has never been achieved by any poet in
any tongue, with more complete perfection and success
than in the immortal Elegy, of which we may truly
say that it has for nearly a century and a half given
to greater multitudes of men more of the exquisite

866



VISCOUNT MORLEY



pleasure of poetry than any other single piece in all
the glorious treasury of English verse. It abounds,
as Johnson says, ' with images which find a mirror in
every mind, and with sentiments to which every bosom
returns an echo.' These moving commonplaces of
the human lot, Gray approached through books and
studious contemplation ; not, as Wordsworth ap-
proached them, by daily contact with the lives and
habit of men and the forces and magical apparitions of
external nature. But it is a narrow view to suppose
that the men of the eighteenth century did not look
through the literary conventions of the day to the
truths of life and nature behind them. The conven-
tions have gone, or are changed, and we are all glad
of it. Wordsworth effected a wholesome deliverance
when he attacked the artificial diction, the personifica-
tions, the allegories, the antitheses, the barren rhymes
and monotonous metres, which the reigning taste had
approved. But while welcoming the new freshness,
sincerity, and direct and fertile return on nature,
that is a very bad reason why we should disparage
poetry so genial, so simple, so humane, and so per-
petually pleasing as the best verse of the rationalistic
century.

Introduction to Wordsworth's Poetual Works

ANNE THACKERAY (LADY RITCHIE)

183&-1919

496 The Children's Hour

AS I write the snow lies thick upon the ground
Jlx. outside, upon the branches of the trees, upon
the lawns. Here, within, the fire leaps brightly in its
iron cage ; the children cluster round the chair by

867



ANNE THACKERAY (LADY RITCHIE)



the chimney corner, where the mother sits reading
their beloved fairy tales. The hearth was empty
once — the home was desolate ; but time after time,
day by day, we see the phoenix of home and of love
springing from the dead ashes ; love kindles and
warms chilled hearts to life.

Take courage, say the happy to those in sorrow and
trouble ; are there not many mansions even here ?
seasons in their course ; harvests in their season, thanks
be to the merciful ordinance that metes out sorrow
and peace, and longing and fulfilment, and rest after
the storm. Take courage, say the happy — the message
of the sorrowful is harder to understand. The echoes
come from afar, and reach beyond our ken. And the
cry passes beyond us into the awful unknown, we feel
that this is, perhaps, the voice in life that reaches
beyond life itself. Not of harvests to come, not of
peaceful home hearths do they speak in their sorrow.
Their fires are out, their hearths are in ashes, but
see, it was the sunlight that extinguished the flame.

Old Kensington

WALTER PATER

1839-1S94

497 £Monna Lisa

THE presence that thus rose so strangely beside
the waters, is expressive of what in the ways of
a thousand years men had come to desire. Hers is
the head upon which all ' the ends of the world are
come,' and the eyelids are a little weary. It is a beauty
wrought out from within upon the flesh, the deposit,
little cell by cell, of strange thoughts and fantastic
reveries and exquisite passions. Set it for a moment
beside one of those white Greek goddesses or beautiful
868



WALTER PATER

women of antiquity, and how would they be troubled
by this beauty, into which the soul with all its maladies
has passed? All the thoughts and experience of the
world have etched and moulded there, in that which
they have of power to refine and make expressive the
outward form, the animalism of Greece, the lust of
Rome, the reverie of the middle age with its spiritual
ambition and imaginative loves, the return of the
Pagan world, the sins of the Borgias. She is older than
the rocks among which she sits ; like the vampire, she
has been dead many times, and learned the secrets
of the grave ; and has been a diver in deep seas, and
keeps their fallen day about her ; and trafficked for
strange webs with Eastern merchants : and, as Leda,
was the mother of Helen of Troy, and, as Saint Anne,
the mother of Mary ; and all this has been to her but
as the sound of lyres and flutes, and lives only in the
delicacy with which it has moulded the changing
lineaments, and tinged the eyelids and the hands.
The fancy of a perpetual life, sweeping together ten
thousand experiences, is an old one ; and modern
thought has conceived the idea of humanity as wrought
upon by, and summing up in itself, all modes of thought
and life. Certainly Lady Lisa might stand as the
embodiment of the old fancy, the symbol of the
modern idea. The Renaissance

498 The Religion of 3(uma

THE day of the ' little ' or private Ambarvalia was
come, to be celebrated by a single family for the
welfare of all belonging to it, as the great college of the
Arval Brothers officiated at Rome in the interest of the
whole state. At the appointed time all work ceases ;

869



WALTER PATER



the instruments of labour lie untouched, hung with
wreaths of flowers, while masters and servants together
go in solemn procession along the dry paths of vineyard
and cornfield, conducting the victims whose blood is
presently to be shed for the purification from all
natural or supernatural taint of the lands they have
' gone about.' The old Latin words of the liturgy,
to be said as the procession moved on its way, though
their precise meaning was long since become unin-
telligible, were recited from an ancient illuminated
roll, kept in the painted chest in the hall, together with
the family records. Early on that day the girls of the
farm had been busy in the great portico, filling large
baskets with flowers plucked short from branches of
apple and cherry, then in spacious bloom, to strew
before the quaint images of the gods — Ceres and
Bacchus and the yet more mysterious Dea Dia — as they
passed through the fields, carried in their little houses
on the shoulders of white-clad youths, who were under-
stood to proceed to this office in perfect temperance,
as pure in soul and body as the air they breathed in
the firm weather of that early summer-time. The clean
lustral water and the full incense-box were carried
after them. The altars were gay with garlands of
wool and the more sumptuous sort of blossom and green
herbs to be thrown into the sacrificial fire, fresh-
gathered this morning from a particular plot in the
old garden, set apart for the purpose. Just then the
young leaves were almost as fragrant as flowers, and
the scent of the bean-fields mingled pleasantly with
the cloud of incense. But for the monotonous intona-
tion of the liturgy by the priests, clad in their strange,
stiff, antique vestments, and bearing ears of green corn
upon their heads, secured by flowing bands of white>
870



WALTER PATER



the procession moved in absolute stillness, all persons,
even the children, abstaining from speech after the
utterance of the pontifical formula, Favete Unguis ! —
Silence ! Propitious Silence ! — lest any words save those
proper to the occasion should hinder the religious effi-
cacy of the rite.

With the lad Marius, who as the head of his house
took a leading part in the ceremonies of the day, there
was a devout effort to complete this impressive outward
silence by that inward tacitness of mind, esteemed so
important by religious Romans in the performance of
these sacred functions. To him the sustained stillness
without seemed really but to be waiting upon that
interior, mental condition of preparation or expectancy,
for which he was just then intently striving.

Manus the Epicurean

4gg The Poetry of Hansard

IN such condition of mind, how deeply, delightfully,
must the poetry of Ronsard and his fellows have
moved him, when he became aware, as from age to
age inquisitive youth by good luck does become aware,
of the literature of his own day, confirming — more
than confirming — anticipation ! Here was a poetry
which boldly assumed the dress, the words, the habits,
the very trick, of contemporary life, and turned them
into gold. It took possession of the lily in one's hand,
and projecting it into a visionary distance, shed upon
the body of the flower the soul of its beauty. Things
were become at once more deeply sensuous and more
deeply ideal. As at the touch of a wizard, something
more came into the rose than its own natural blush.
Occupied so closely with the visible, this new poetry

871



WALTER PATER

had so profound an intuition of what can only be felt,
and maintained that mood in speaking of such objects
as wine, fruit, the plume in the cap, the ring on the
finger. And still that was no dubious or generalised
form it gave to flower or bird, but the exact pressure
of the jay at the window ; you could count the petals,
— of the exact natural number ; no expression could
be too faithful to the precise texture of things ; words,
too, must embroider, be twisted and spun, like silk
or golden hair. Here were real people, in their real,
delightful attire, and you understood how they
moved ; the visible was more visible than ever before,
just because soul had come to its surface. The juice
in the flowers, when Ronsard named them, was like
wine or blood. It was such a coloured thing ; though
the grey things also, the cool things, all the fresher
for the contrast — with a freshness, again, that seemed
to touch and cool the soul — found their account there ;
the clangorous passage of the birds at night foretoken-
ing rain, the moan of the wind at the door, the wind's
self made visible over the yielding corn.

Gaston de Latour

500 ^Montaigne

SOCIABLE, of sociable intellect, and still inclining
instinctively, as became his fresh and agreeable
person, from the midway of life, towards its youthful
side, he was ever on the alert for a likely interlocutor
to take part in the conversation, which (pleasantest,
truly ! of all modes of human commerce) was also of
ulterior service as stimulating that endless inward
converse from which the essays were a kind of abstract.
For him, as for Plato, for Socrates whom he cites so
872



WALTER PATER

often, the essential dialogue was that of the mind
with itself ; but this dialogue throve best with, often
actually needed, outward stimulus — physical motion,
some text shot from a book, the queries and objections
of a living voice. — ' My thoughts sleep, if I sit still.'
Neither ' thoughts,' nor ' dialogues,' exclusively, but
thoughts still partly implicate in the dialogues which
had evoked them, and therefore not without many
seemingly arbitrary transitions, many links of connexion
to be supposed by the reader, constituting their
characteristic difficulty, the Essays owed their actual
publication at last to none of the usual literary motives
— desire for fame, to instruct, to amuse, to sell — but
to the sociable desire for a still wider range of conversa-
tion with others. He wrote for companionship, ' if
but one sincere man would make his acquaintance ' ;
speaking on paper, as he ' did to the first person he
met.' — ' If there be any person, any knot of good
company, in France or elsewhere, who can like my
humour, and whose humours I can like, let them but
whistle, and I will run ! ' Gaston de Latour

ANONYMOUS
501 The Poetry of Qardening

1839

OF all the vain assumptions of these coxcomical
times, that which arrogates the pre-eminence in
the true science of gardening is the vainest. True,
our conservatories are full of the choicest plants from
every clime ; we ripen the grape and the pine-apple
with an art unknown before, and even the mango, the
mangosteen, and the guava are made to yield their
matured fruits ; but the real beauty and poetry of

873



ANONYMOUS



a garden are lost in our efforts after rarity, and strange-
ness, and variety. To be the possessor of a unique
pansy, the introducer of a new specimen of the
Orchidaceae, or the cultivator of five hundred choice
varieties of the dahlia, is now the only claim to garden-
ing celebrity and Horticultural medals.

And then our lot has fallen in the evil days of
System. We are proud of our natural or English style ;
and scores of unmeaning flower-beds, disfiguring the
lawn in the shapes of kidneys, and tadpoles and
sausages, and leeches, and commas, are the result.
Landscape-gardening has encroached too much upon
gardening-proper ; and this has had the same effect
upon our gardens that horticultural societies have had
on our fruits — to make us entertain the vulgar notion,
that size is virtue. . .

If we review the various styles that have prevailed
in England, from the knotted gardens of Elizabeth, the
pleach-work and intricate flower-borders of James I,
the painted Dutch statues and canals of William and
Mary, the winding gravel walks and lace-making of
Brown, to poor Shenstone's sentimental farm and the
landscape-fashion of the present day — we shall have
little reason to pride ourselves on the advance which
national taste has made upon the earliest efforts in
this department. . .

My garden should lie to the south of the house ; the
ground gradually sloping for some short way till it
falls abruptly into the dark and tangled shrubberies
that all but hide the winding brook below. A broad
terrace, half as wide, at least, as the house is high,
should run along the whole southern length of the
building, extending to the western side also, whence,
over the distant country, I may catch the last red light
874



ANONYMOUS

of the setting sun. I must have some musk and
noisette roses, and jasmine, to run up the mullions of
my oriel window, and honeysuckles and clematis, the
white, the purple, and the blue, to cluster round the
top. The upper terrace should be strictly architec-
tural, and no plants are to be harboured there, save
such as twine among the balustrades, or fix themselves
in the mouldering crevices of the stone. I can endure
no plants in pots — a plant in a pot is like a bird in
a cage. The gourd alone throws out its vigorous
tendrils, and displays its green and golden fruit from
the vases that surmount the broad flight of stone steps
that lead to the lower terrace ; while a vase of larger
dimensions and bolder sculpture at the western corner
is backed by the heads of a mass of crimson, rose, and
straw-coloured hollyhocks that spring up from the
bank below. The lower terrace is twice the width
of the one above, of the most velvety turf, laid out in
an elaborate pattern of the Italian style. Here are
collected the choicest flowers of the garden, the
Dalmatic purple of the gentianella, the dazzling
scarlet of the verbena, the fulgent lobelia, the bright
yellows and rich browns of the calceolaria here luxuriate
in their trimly cut parterres, and with colours as
brilliant as the mosaic of an old cathedral painted
window

Broider the ground
With rich inlay.

Tot fuerant llhc, quot habet natura, colores :
Pictaque dissimili flore nitebat humus. Ovid.

But you must leave this mass of gorgeous colouring
and the two pretty fountains that play in their basins
of native rock, while you descend the flight of steps,
simpler than those of the upper terrace, and turn to

875



ANONYMOUS



the left hand, where a broad gravel walk will lead you
to the kitchen-garden, through an avenue splendid in
autumn with hollyhocks, dahlias, China asters, nastur-
tians, and African marigolds.

We will stop short of the walled garden to turn
among the clipt hedges of box, and yew, and horn-
beam which surround the bowling-green, and lead to
a curiously formed labyrinth, in the centre of which,
perched up on a triangular mound, is a fanciful old
summer-house, with a gilded roof, that commands the
view of the whole surrounding country.

The Carthusian

AUSTIN DOBSON

1840-1921

502 <£Mrs. Hogarth

TOWARD the close of the last century, the regular
attendants upon the ministrations of the Rev.
James Trebeck in the picturesque old church at the
end of Chiswick Mall, must often have witnessed the
arrival of a well-known member of the congregation.
Year after year had been wheeled, in a Bath chair,
from a little villa under the wing of the Duke of
Devonshire's mansion hard by, a stately old lady
between seventy and eighty years of age, whose
habitual costume was a silk sacque, a raised head-
dress, and a black calash. Leaning heavily upon her
crutched cane, and aided by the arm of a portly
female relative in similar attire, she would make her
way slowly and with much dignity up the nave, being
generally preceded by a bent and white-haired man-
servant, who, after carrying the prayer-books into the
pew, and carefully closing the door upon his mistress
876



AUSTIN DOBSON

and her companion, would himself retire to a remoter
part of the building. From the frequenters of the
place, the little procession attracted no more notice
than any other recognized ceremonial, of which the
intermission would alone have been remarkable ; but
it seldom failed to excite the curiosity of those way-
farers who, under the third George, already sought
reverently, along the pleasant riverside, for that house
in Mawson's Buildings where the great Mr. Pope wrote
part of his ' Iliad,' or for the garden of Richard, Earl
of Burlington, where idle John Gay gorged himself
with apricots and peaches. They would be told that
the elder lady was the widow of the famous painter,
William Hogarth, who lay buried under the teacaddy-
like tomb in the neighbouring churchyard ; that her
companion was her cousin, Mary Lewis, in whose arms
he died ; and that the old servant's name was Samuel.
For five and twenty years Mrs. Hogarth survived
her husband, during all of which time she faithfully
cherished his memory. Those who visited her at her
Chiswick home (for she had another in Leicester Fields)
would recall with what tenacity she was wont to com-
bat the view that he was a mere maker of caricatura,
or, at best, ' a writer of comedy with the pencil,' as
Mr. Horace Walpole (whose over-critical book she had
not even condescended to acknowledge) had thought
fit to designate him. It was as a painter pure and
simple, as a rival of the Guidos and Correggios, that
she mainly valued her William. ' They said he could
not colour ! ' she would cry, pointing, it may be, as
a protest against the words, to the brilliant sketch of
the ' Shrimp Girl,' now in the National Gallery, but
then upon her wails.

Eighteenth Century Vignettes, First Sertes
877



THOMAS HARDY

1840-

50J ^Midnight on St. Thomas's Sve

THE sky was clear — remarkably clear — and the
twinkling of all the stars seemed to be but throbs
of one body, timed by a common pulse. The North
Star was directly in the wind's eye, and since evening
the Bear had swung round it outwardly to the east,
till he was now at a right angle with the meridian.
A difference of colour in the stars — oftener read of
than seen in England — was really perceptible here.
The sovereign brilliancy of Sirius pierced the eye with
a steely glitter, the star called Capella was yellow,
Aldebaran and Betelgueux shone with a fiery red.

To persons standing alone on a hill during a clear
midnight such as this, the roll of the world eastward
is almost a palpable movement. The sensauon may
be caused by the panoramic glide of the stars past
earthly objects, which is perceptible in a few minutes
of stillness, or by the better outlook upon space that
a hill affords, or by the wind, or by the solitude ; but
whatever be its origin the impression of riding along
is vivid and abiding. The poetry of motion is a phrase
much in use, and to enjoy the epic form of that
gratification it is necessary to stand on a hill at a small
hour of the night, and, having first expanded with
a sense of difference from the mass of civilized mankind,
who are dreamwrapt and disregardful of all such
proceedings at this time, long and quietly watch your
stately progress through the stars. After such a
nocturnal reconnoitre it is hard to get back to earth,
and to believe that the consciousness of such majestic
speeding is derived from a tiny human frame.

Far Jrom the Madding Crowd

878



THOMAS HARDY



504 The ' Victory ' ^Passes

THE wild, herbless, weather-worn promontory wa9
quite a solitude, and, saving the one old lighthouse
about fifty yards up the slope, scarce a mark was visible
to show that humanity had ever been near the spot.
Anne found herself a seat on a stone, and swept with
her eyes the tremulous expanse of water around her
that seemed to utter a ceaseless unintelligible incanta-
tion. Out of the three hundred and sixty degrees
of her complete horizon two hundred and fifty were
covered by waves, the coup d'ceil including the area
of troubled waters known as the Race, where two seas
met to effect the destruction of such vessels as could
not be mastered by one. She counted the craft
within her view : there were five ; no, there were
only four ; no, there were seven, some of the specks
having resolved themselves into two. They were all
small coasters, and kept well within sight of land.

Anne sank into a reverie. Then she heard a slight
noise on her left hand, and turning beheld an old
sailor, who had approached with a glass. He was
levelling it over the sea in a direction to the south-east,
and somewhat removed from that in which her own
eyes had been wandering. Anne moved a few steps
thitherward, so as to unclose to her view a deeper
sweep on that side, and by this discovered a ship of far
larger size than any which had yet dotted the main
before her. Its sails were for the most part new and
clean, and in comparison with its rapid progress before
the wind the small brigs and ketches seemed standing
still. Upon this striking object the old man's glass
was bent.

' What do you see, sailor ? ' she asked.

879



THOMAS HARDY



' Almost nothing,' he answered. ' My sight is so
gone off lately that things, one and all, be but a
November mist to me. And yet I fain would see to-
day. I am looking for the Victory?

' Why f ' she said quickly.

' I have a son aboard her. He 's one of three from
these parts. There 's the captain, there 's my son Jim,
and there 's young Loveday of Overcombe — he that
lately joined.'

' Shall I look for you ? ' said Anne, after a pause.

' Certainly, mis' ess, if so be you please.'

Anne took the glass, and he supported it by his
arm. ' It is a large ship,' she said, ' with three masts,
three rows of guns along the side, and all her sails set.'

' I guessed as much.'

' There is a little flag in front — over her bow-
sprit.'

' The jack.'

' And there 's a large one flying at her stern.'
' The ensign.'

' And a white one on her fore-topmast.'

' That 's the admiral's flag, the flag of my Lord
Nelson. What is her figure-head, my dear I '

' A coat-of-arms, supported on this side by a sailor.'

Her companion nodded with satisfaction. ' On the
other side of that figure-head is a marine.'

' She is twisting round in a curious way, and her
sails sink in like old cheeks, and she shivers like a leaf
upon a tree.'

' She is in stays, for the larboard tack. I can see
what she 's been doing. She 's been re'ching close
in to avoid the flood tide, as the wind is to the sou' -west,
and she 's bound down ; but as soon as the ebb made,
d'ye see, they made sail to the west'ard. Captain
880



THOMAS HARDY



Hardy may be depended upon for that ; he knows
every current about here, being a native.'

' And now I can see the other side ; it is a soldier
where a sailor was before. You are sure it is the
Victory ? '

' I am sure.' . .

The great silent ship, with her population of blue-
jackets, marines, officers, captain, and the admiral who
was not to return alive, passed like a phantom the
meridian of the Bill. Sometimes her aspect was that
of a large white bat, sometimes that of a grey one. In
the course of time the watching girl saw that the ship
had passed her nearest point ; the breadth of her sails
diminished by foreshortening, till she assumed the
form of an egg on end. After this something seemed
to twinkle, and Anne, who had previously withdrawn
from the old sailor, went back to him, and looked again
through the glass. The twinkling was the light falling
upon the cabin windows of the ship's stern. She
explained it to the old man.

' Then we see now what the enemy have seen but
once. That was in seventy-nine, when she sighted the
French and Spanish fleet off Scilly, and she retreated
because she feared a landing. Well, 'tis a brave ship,
and she carries brave men ! '. .

The courses of the V ictory were absorbed into the
main, then her topsails went, and then her top-gallants.
She was now no more than a dead fly's wing on a sheet
of spider's web ; and even this fragment diminished.
Anne could hardly bear to see the end, and yet she
resolved not to flinch. The admiral's flag sank behind
the watery line, and in a minute the very truck of
the last topmast stole away. The V ictory was gone.

The Trumpet Major
881



THOMAS HARDY



505 *A Tree-Planting

HE descended the path, and looked out, and beheld
Marty South, dressed for out-door work.
' Why didn't you come, Mr. Winterborne f ' she
said ; ' I've been waiting there hours and hours, and
at last I thought I must try to find you ! '

' Bless my soul, I'd quite forgot ! ' said Giles.
What he had forgotten was that there were a
thousand young fir trees to be planted in a neighbour-
ing spot which had been cleared by the wood-cutters,
and that he had arranged to plant them with his own
hands. He had a marvellous power of making trees
grow. Although he would seem to shovel in the earth
quite carelessly there was a sort of sympathy between
himself and the fir, oak, or beech that he was operating
on ; so that the roots took hold of the soil in a few
days. When, on the other hand, any of the journey-
men planted, although they seemed to go through an
identically similar process, one quarter of the trees
would die away during the ensuing August.

Hence Winterborne found delight in the work even
when, as at present, he contracted to do it on portions
of the woodland in which he had no personal interest.
Marty, who turned her hand to anything, was usually
the one who performed the part of keeping the trees in
a perpendicular position whilst he threw in the mould.

He accompanied her towards the spot, being inclined
yet further to proceed with the work by the knowledge
that the ground was close to the roadside along which
Grace must pass on her way from Hintock House.

' You've a cold in the head, Marty,' he said as they
walked. ' That comes of cutting off your hair.'

' I suppose it do. Yes ; I've three headaches going
on in my head at the same time.'
882



THOMAS HARDY



' Three headaches ! '

' Yes, Mr. Winterborne : a rheumatic headache in
my poll, a sick headache over my eyes, and a misery
headache in the middle of my brain. However, I came
out, for I thought you might be waiting and grumbling
like anything if I was not there.'

The holes were already dug, and they set to work.
Winterborne's fingers were endowed with a gentle
conjuror's touch in spreading the roots of each little
tree, resulting in a sort of caress under which the
delicate fibres all laid themselves out in their proper
directions for growth. He put most of these roots
towards the south-west ; for, he said, in forty years'
time, when some great gale is blowing from that
quarter, the trees will require the strongest holdfast
on that side to stand against it and not fall.

' How they sigh directly we put 'em upright, though
while they are lying down they don't sigh at all,' said
Marty.

' Do they ? ' said Giles. ' I've never noticed it.'

She erected one of the young pines into its hole,
and held up her finger ; the soft musical breathing
instantly set in which was not to cease night or day
till the grown tree should be felled — probably long
after the two planters had been felled themselves.

' It seems to me,' the girl continued, ' as if they
sigh because they are very sorry to begin life in earnest
— just as we be.'

' Just as we be ? ' He looked critically at her. ' You
ought not to feel like that, Marty.'

Her only reply was turning to take up the next
tree ; and they planted on through a great part of
the day, almost without another word.

The Woodlanders



883



THOMAS HARDY



506 <£Marty has her ^Reward

MELBURY now returned to the room, and the
men having declared themselves refreshed they
all started on the homeward journey, which was by
no means cheerless under the rays of the high moon.
Having to walk the whole distance they came by
a footpath rather shorter than the highway, though
difficult except to those who knew the country well.
This brought them by way of the church : and
passing the graveyard they observed as they talked
a motionless figure standing by the gate.

' I think it was Marty South,' said the hollow-
turner parenthetically.

' I think 'twas ; 'a was always a lonely maid,' said
Upjohn. And they passed on homeward, and thought
of the matter no more.

It was Marty, as they had supposed. That evening
had been the particular one of the week upon which
Grace and herself had been accustomed to privately
deposit flowers on Giles's grave, and this was the first
occasion since his death eight months earlier on which
Grace had failed to keep her appointment. Marty
had waited in the road just outside Melbury's, where
her fellow-pilgrim had been wont to join her, till she
was weary ; and at last, thinking that Grace had
missed her, and gone on alone, she followed the way
to the church, but saw no Grace in fiont of her. It
got later, and Marty continued her walk till she
reached the churchyard gate ; but still no Grace. Yet
her sense of comradeship would not allow her to go
on to the grave alone, and still thinking the delay had
been unavoidable she stood there with her little
basket of flowers in her clasped hands, and her feet
884



THOMAS HARDY



chilled by the damp ground, till more than two hours
had passed. She then heard the footsteps of Melbury's
men, who presently passed on their return from the
search. In the silence of the night Marty could not
help hearing fragments of their conversation, from
which she acquired a general idea of what had occurred,
and that Mrs. Fitzpiers was by that time in the arms
of another man than Giles.

Immediately they had dropped down the hill she
entered the churchyard, going to a secluded corner
behind the bushes where rose the unadorned stone
that marked the last bed of Giles Winterborne. As
this solitary and silent girl stood there in the moon-
light, a straight slim figure, clothed in a plaitless gown,
the contours of womanhood so undeveloped as to be
scarcely perceptible in her, the marks of poverty and
toil effaced by the misty hour, she touched sublimity at
points, and looked almost like a being who had rejected
with indifference the attribute of sex for the loftier
quality of abstract humanism. She stooped down and
cleared away the withered flowers that Grace and
herself had laid there the previous week, and put
her fresh ones in their place.

' Now, my own, own love,' she whispered, ' you are
mine, and only mine ; for she has forgot 'ee at last,
although for her you died ! But I — whenever I get
up I'll think of 'ee, and whenever I lie down I'll
think of 'ee again. Whenever I plant the young larches
I'll think that none can plant as you planted ; and
whenever I split a gad, and whenever I turn the cider
wring, I'll say none could do it like you. If ever
I forget your name let me forget home and heaven ! . .
But no, no, my love, I never can forget 'ee ; for you
was a good man, and did good things ! '

The Woodlanders

885



W. H. HUDSON



1841-1921

507 The Return of the

ON a warm, brilliant morning in late April I paid
a visit to a shallow lakelet or pond five or six
acres in extent which I had discovered some weeks
before hidden in a depression in the land, among
luxuriant furze, bramble, and blackthorn bushes.
Between the thickets the boggy ground was everywhere
covered with great tussocks of last year's dead and
faded marsh grass — a wet, rough, lonely place where
a lover of solitude need have no fear of being intruded
on by a being of his own species, or even a wandering
moorland donkey. On arriving at the pond I was
surprised and delighted to find half the surface covered
with a thick growth of bog-bean just coming into
flower. The quaint three-lobed leaves, shaped like
a grebe's foot, were still small, and the flower-stocks,
thick as corn in a field, were crowned with pyramids
of buds, cream and rosy-red like the opening dropwort
clusters, and at the lower end of the spikes were the
full-blown singular, snow-white, cottony flowers — our
strange and beautiful water edelweiss.

A group of ancient, gnarled and twisted alder bushes,
with trunks like trees, grew just on the margin of the
pond, and by-and-by I found a comfortable arm-chair
on the lower stout horizontal branches overhanging
the water, and on that seat I rested for a long time,
enjoying the sight of that rare unexpected loveliness.

The chiff-chaff, the common warbler of this moor-
land district, was now abundant, more so than any-
where else in England ; two or three were flitting
886



W. H. HUDSON

about among the alder leaves within a few feet of my
head, and a dozen at least were singing within hearing,
chiff -chaffing near and far, their notes sounding
strangely loud at that still, sequestered spot. Listening
to that insistent sound I was reminded of Warde
Fowler's words about the sweet season which brings
new life and hope to men, and how a seal and sanction
is put on it by that same small bird's clear resonant
voice. I endeavoured to recall the passage, saying to
myself that in order to enter fully into the feeling
expressed it is sometimes essential to know an author's
exact words. Failing in this, I listened again to the
bird, then let my eyes rest on the expanse of red and
cream-coloured spikes before me, then on the masses
of flame-yellow furze beyond, then on something else.
I was endeavouring to keep my attention on these
extraneous things, to shut my mind resolutely against
a thought, intolerably sad, which had surprised me in
that quiet solitary place. Surely, I said, this spring-
time verdure and bloom, this fragrance of the furze,
the infinite blue of heaven, the bell-like double note
of this my little feathered neighbour in the alder tree,
flitting hither and thither, light and airy himself as
a wind-fluttered alder leaf — surely this is enough to
fill and to satisfy any heart, leaving no room for a grief
so vain and barren, which nothing in nature suggested !
That it should find me out here in this wilderness of
all places — the place to which a man might come to
divest himself of himself — that second self which he
has unconsciously acquired — to be like the trees and
animals, outside of the sad atmosphere of human life
and its eternal tragedy ! A vain effort and a vain
thought, since that from which I sought to escape
came from nature itself, from every visible thing;

887



W. H. HUDSON

every leaf and flower and blade was eloquent of it,
and the very sunshine, that gave life and brilliance to
all things, was turned to darkness by it.

A Traveller in Ltttle Things

508 Thirds and Death

THE bird, however hard the frost may be, flies
briskly to his customary roosting-place, and, with
beak tucked into his wing, falls asleep. He has no
apprehensions ; only the hot blood grows colder and
colder, the pulse feebler as he sleeps, and at midnight,
or in the early morning, he drops from his perch — dead.

Yesterday he lived and moved, responsive to a
thousand external influences, reflecting earth and sky
in his small brilliant brain as in a looking-glass ; also
he had a various language, the inherited knowledge of
his race, and the faculty of flight, by means of which
he could shoot, meteor-like, across the sky, and pass
swiftly from place to place ; and with it such perfect
control over all his organs, such marvellous certitude
in all his motions, as to be able to drop himself p^lumb
down from the tallest tree-top, or out of the void air,
on to a slender spray, and scarcely cause its leaves
to tremble. Now, on this morning, he lies stiff and
motionless ; if you were to take him up and drop him
from your hand, he would fall to the ground like a
stone or a lump of clay — so easy and swift is the passage
from life to death in wild nature ! But he was never
miserable.

Birds in Town and Village



888



W. H. HUDSON



509 Tilgrims at the Land's End

THERE were days at the headland when I observed
a goodish number of elderly men among the
ilgrims, some very old, and this at first surprised me,
ut by-and-by it began to seem only natural. I was
particularly impressed one day at noon in early spring
in clear but cold weather with a biting north-east
wind, when I found six or seven aged men sitting about
on the rocks that lie scattered over the green slope
behind the famous promontory. They were too old
or too feeble to venture down on the rough headland :
their companions had strayed away, some to the
fishing cove, others along the higher cliffs, and left
them there to rest. They were in great-coats with
scarves and comforters round their necks, and hats or
caps drawn well down ; and they sat mostly in dejected
attitudes, bending forward, their hands resting on the
handles of their sticks, some with their chins on their
hands, but all gazed in one direction over the cold
grey sea. Strangers to each other, unlike in life and
character, coming from widely separated places, some
probably from countries beyond the ocean, yet all
here, silently gazing in one direction beyond that rocky
foreland, with the same look of infinite weariness on
their grey faces and in their dim sad eyes, as if one
thought and feeling and motive had drawn them to
this spot. Can it be that the sentiment or fancy which
is sown in our minds in childhood and lies asleep and
forgotten in us through most of our years, revives and
acquires towards the end a new and strange significance
when we have entered upon our second childhood?
The period, I mean, when we recover our ancient
mental possessions — the heirlooms which cannot be

889



W. H. HUDSON



alienated or lost, which have descended to us from our
remotest progenitors through centuries and thousands
of years. These old men cannot see the objects which
appear to younger eyes — the distant passing ships, and
the land — that dim, broken line, as of a low cloud on
the horizon, of the islands : their sight is altered from
what it was, yet is, perhaps, now able to discern things
invisible to us — other islands, uncharted, not the
Cassiterides. What are they, these other islands, and
what do we know of them ? Nothing at all ; indeed,
nothing can be known to the generality ; only these
life-weary ancients, sitting on rocks and gazing at
vacancy, might enlighten us if they would. Un-
doubtedly there are differences of sight among them
which would make their descriptions vary, but they
would probably all agree in affirming that the scene
before them has no resemblance to the earlier vision.
This grey-faced very old man with his chin on his
hands, who looks as if he had not smiled these many
years, would perhaps smile now if he were to recall
that former vision, which came by teaching and served
well enough during his hot youth and strenuous
middle age. He does not see before him a beautiful
blessed land bright with fadeless flowers, nor a great
multitude of people in shining garments and garlands
who will come down to the shore to welcome him with
sounds of shouting and singing and playing on instru-
ments of divers forms, and who will lead him in triumph
to the gardens of everlasting delight and to mansions
of crystal with emerald and amethyst colonnades and
opal domes and turrets and pinnacles. Those glories
and populous realms of joy have quite vanished : he
sees now only what his heart desires — a silent land of
rest. No person will greet him there ; he will land
and go up alone into that empty and solitary place,
890



W. H. HUDSON

a still grey wilderness extending inland and upward
hundreds of leagues, an immeasurable distance, into
infinity, and rising to mountain ridges compared with
which the Himalayas are but molehills. The sky in
that still land is always pale grey-blue in colour, and
the earth, too, is grey like the rocks, and the trees
have a grey-green foliage — trees more ancient in
appearance than the worn granite hills, with gnarled
and buttressed trunks like vast towers and immense
horizontal branches, casting a slight shade over many
acres of ground. Onwards and upwards, with eyes
downcast, he will slowly take his devious way to the
interior, feeling the earth with his staff, in search of
a suitable last resting-place. And when he has
travelled many, many leagues and has found it — a spot
not too sunny nor too deeply shaded, where the old
fallen dead leaves and dry moss have formed a thick soft
couch to recline on and a grey exposed root winding
over the earth offers a rest to his back — -there at length
he will settle himself. There he will remain motionless
and contented for ever in that remote desert land
where is no sound of singing bird nor of running water
nor of rain or wind in the grey ancient trees : waking
and sleeping he will rest there, dreaming little and
thinking less, while year by year and age by age the
memory of the world of passion and striving of which
he was so unutterably tired grows fainter and fainter
in his mind. And he will have neither joy nor sorrow,
nor love nor hate, nor wish to know them any more ;
and when he remembers his fellow-men it will comfort
him to think that his peace will never be broken by
the sight of human face or the sound of human speech,
since never by any chance will any wanderer from the
world discover him in that illimitable wilderness.

The Land's End
891



HENRY DUFF TRAILL

1842-1900

510 cpiato and Landor in Slysium

PLATO. I am persuaded, my friend, that you
think too ill of your country and its manners. . .
Do they not send us more poets ? Do they not send
us more painters i

Landor. Ay, truly ; they send us any number — and
all of them immortal. It is true they are a little
difficult to distinguish from each other. The poets
seem to have written all their poems with a paint-
brush, and the painters were apparently unable to
complete their pictures without the pen. But what
has this to do with the things of the mind ?

Plato. Much, surely ; unless poetry and art among
you have ceased to be an exercise of the faculties
according to a law of right reason. Have they ?

Landor. I would rather let the painters answer for
themselves. But as for the poets, I do not feel justified
in associating the name of reason with many of their
performances ; nor, exceptions excepted, can I even
think of them in connexion with the idea of ' law '.

Plato. Do you mean that they reject the supreme
authority of reason as a guide and moderator in their
compositions ?

Landor. I mean that they not only reject but insult
it. A poem by one of these poets is either a riot of the
imagination or a mutiny of the passions, and Reason
would present herself there with as much rashness as
an unpopular magistrate at a tumult among the
cobblers. They would pelt her from the scene with
rotten adjectives.
Plato. You are, indeed, describing a lawless and
892



HENRY DUFF TRAILL



licentious class of men. . . Yet even these express
reverence for Greek art, and for the Greek spirit, and,
I doubt not, feel it.

Landor. It is impossible, O Plato, that you can have
met any of them, or you would never think so.

Plato. Nay, I have been in their company more
than once.

Landor. And failed to convict them of imposture ?
— Perhaps, then, it was all Socrates. There may be
something in the Boswell theory of the Platonic
Dialogues after all.

Plato. I cannot hear what you are saying.

Landor. I was merely repeating to myself a passage
from one of the Homeric hymns. . .

The New Lutxan

WILLIAM JAMES

1842-1910

511 The Will to ^Believe

I CONFESS that I do not see why the very existence
of an invisible world may not in part depend on
the personal response which any one of us may make
to the religious appeal. God himself, in short, may
draw vital strength and increase of very being from
our fidelity. For my own part, I do not know what the
sweat and blood and tragedy of this life mean, if they
mean anything short of this. If this life be not a real
fight, in which something is eternally gained for the
universe by success, it is no better than a game of
private theatricals from which one may withdraw at
will. But it feels like a real fight, — as if there were
something really wild in the universe which we, with
all our idealities and faithfulnesses, are needed to

893



WILLIAM JAMES

redeem ; and first of all to redeem our own hearts
from atheisms and fears. For such a half-wild, half-
saved universe our nature is adapted. The deepest
thing in our nature is . . . this dumb region of the
heart in which we dwell alone with our willing-
nesses and unwillingnesses, our faiths and fears. As
through the cracks and crannies of caverns those
waters exude from the earth's bosom which then form
the fountain-heads of springs, so in these crepuscular
depths of personality the sources of all our outer deeds
and decisions take their rise. Here is our deepest
organ of communication with the nature of things ;
and compared with these concrete movements of our
soul all abstract statements and scientific arguments —
the veto, for example, which the strict positivist
pronounces upon our faith — sound to us like mere
chatterings of the teeth. . .

These then are my last words to you : Be not afraid
of life. Believe that life is worth living, and your belief
will help create the fact. The ' scientific proof ' that
you are right may not be clear before the day of
judgment (or some stage of being which that expression
may serve to symbolize) is reached. But the faithful
fighters of this hour, or the beings that then and there
will represent them, may then turn to the faint-hearted,
who here decline to go on, with words like those with
which Henry IV greeted the tardy Crillon after a great
victory had been gained : ' Hang yourself, brave
Crillon ! we fought at Arques, and you were not
there.'

The Will to Believe



894



CHARLES DOUGHTY

1843-

512 The Deaf and Dumb

AS we sat, one came in who but then returned from
k an absence ; as the custom is he would first
declare his tidings in the mejlis, and afterward go
home to his own household. He sat down on his
knee, but was so poor a man, there was none in the
sheykhly company that rose to kiss him : with a
solemn look he stayed him a moment on his camel-
stick, and then pointing gravely with it to every man,
one after other, he saluted him with an hollow voice,
by his name, saying, ' The Lord strengthen thee ! '
A poor old Beduin wife, when she heard that her
son was come again, had followed him over the hot
sand hither ; now she stood to await him, faintly
leaning upon a stake of the beyt a little without, since
it is not for any woman to enter where the men's
mejlis is sitting. His tidings told, he stepped abroad
to greet his mother, who ran and cast her weak arms
about his manly neck, trembling for age and tender-
ness, to see him alive again and sound ; and kissing
him she could not speak, but uttered little cries. Some
of the coffee-drinkers laughed roughly, and mocked
her drivelling, but Motlog said, ' Wherefore laugh ?
is not this the love of a mother ? '

Travels in Arabia Deseria

513 The Desert Day

THE summer's night at end, the sun stands up as
a crown of hostile flames from that huge covert
of inhospitable sandstone bergs ; the desert day dawns
not little and little, but it is noontide in an hour.
3 mejhs) assembly 14 beyt) booth

895



CHARLES DOUGHTY

The sun, entering as a tyrant upon the waste landscape,
darts upon us a torment of fiery beams, not to be
remitted till the far-off evening. — No matins here of
birds ; not a rock partridgc-cock, calling with blithe-
some chuckle over the extreme waterless desolation.
Grave is that giddy heat upon the crown of the head ;
the ears tingle with a flickering shrillness, a subtle
crepitation it seems, in the glassiness of this sun-
stricken nature : the hot sand-blink is in the eyes,
and there is little refreshment to find in the tents'
shelter ; the worsted booths leak to this fiery rain of
sunny light. Mountains looming like dry bones
through the thin air, stand far around about us :
the savage flank of Ybba Moghrair, the high spire and
ruinous stacks of el-Jebal, Chebad, the coast of
Helwan ! Herds of weak nomad camels waver dis-
persedly, seeking pasture in the midst of this hollow
fainting country, where but lately the swarming locusts
have fretted every green thing. This silent air
burning about us, we endure breathless till the assr :
when the dazing Arabs in the tents revive after their
heavy hours. The lingering day draws down to the
sun-setting ; the herdsmen, weary of the sun, come
again with the cattle, to taste in their menzils the first
sweetness of mirth and repose. — The day is done,
and there rises the nightly freshness of this purest
mountain air : and then to the cheerful song and the
cup at the common fire. The moon rises ruddy from
that solemn obscurity of jebel like a mighty beacon : —
and the morrow will be as this day, days deadly
drowned in the sun of the summer wilderness.

Travels in Arabia Deserla

20 assr) hour of the third prayer 24 menztls) camping-grounds
29 jebel) mountain

896



HENRY JAMES

1843-1916

514 <sAn ^Archangel Slightly Damaged

SUDDENLY, at the end of twenty minutes, there
was projected across this clearness the image of
a massive, middle-aged man seated on a bench, under
a tree, with sad, far-wandering eyes and plump white
hands folded on the head of a stick — a stick I recog-
nised, a stout gold-headed staff that I had given him
in devoted days. I stopped short as he turned his
face to me, and it happened that for some reason or
other I took in as I had perhaps never done before
the beauty of his rich blank gaze. It was charged with
experience as the sky is charged with light, and I felt
on the instant as if we had been overspanned and
conjoined by the great arch of a bridge or the great
dome of a temple. Doubtless I was rendered peculiarly
sensitive to it by something in the way I had been
giving him up and sinking him. While I met it I stood
there smitten, and I felt myself responding to it with
a sort of guilty grimace. This brought back his atten-
tion in a smile which expressed for me a cheerful,
weary patience, a bruised, noble gentleness. I had
told Miss Anvoy that he had no dignity, but what did
he seem to me, all unbuttoned and fatigued as he
waited for me to come up, if he didn't seem uncon-
cerned with small things, didn't seem in short majestic ?
There was majesty in his mere unconsciousness of our
little conferences and puzzlements over his main-
tenance and his reward.

After I had sat by him a few minutes I passed my
arm over his big soft shoulder (wherever you touched
him you found equally little firmness) and said in
a tone of which the suppliance fell oddly on my own
2830 g g 897



HENRY JAMES

ear : ' Come back to town with me, old friend — come
back and spend the evening.' I wanted to hold him,
I wanted to keep him, and at Waterloo, an hour later,
I telegraphed possessively to the Mulvilles. When he
objected, as regards staying all night, that he had no
things, I asked him if he hadn't everything of mine.
I had abstained from ordering dinner, and it was
too late for preliminaries at a club ; so we were reduced
to tea and fried fish at my rooms — reduced also to the
transcendent. Something had come up which made
me want him to feel at peace with me — and which,
precisely, was all the dear man himself wanted on any
occasion. I had too often had to press upon him con-
siderations irrelevant, but it gives me pleasure now to
think that on that particular evening I didn't even
mention Mrs. Saltram and the children. Late into
the night we smoked and talked ; old shames and old
rigours fell away from us ; I only let him see that I
was conscious of what I owed him. He was as mild as
contrition and as copious as faith ; he was never so
fine as on a shy return, and even better at forgiving
than at being forgiven. I dare say it was a smaller
matter than that famous night at Wimbledon, the
night of the problematical sobriety and of Miss Anvoy's
initiation ; but I was as much in it on this occasion as I
had been out of it then. At about 1.30 he was sublime.

The Coxon Fund

515 Philosophy oj a Cfrand "Dame

OLD Madame de Mauves had nothing severe but
her nose, and she seemed to Euphemia — what
indeed she had every claim to pass for — the very
image and pattern of an ' historical character '. Be-
898



HENRY JAMES

longing to a great order of things, she patronized the
young stranger who was ready to sit all day at her feet
and listen to anecdotes of the bon temps and quotations
from the family chronicles. Madame de Mauves was
a very honest old woman ; she uttered her thoughts
with ancient plainness. One day after pushing back
Euphemia's shining locks and blinking with some
tenderness from behind an immense face-a-main that
acted as for the relegation of the girl herself to the glass
case of a museum, she declared with an energetic shake
of the head that she didn't know what to make of such
a little person. And in answer to the little person's
evident wonder, ' I should like to advise you,' she said,
' but you seem to me so all of a piece that I'm afraid
that if I advise you I shall spoil you. It 's easy to see
you're not one of us. I don't know whether you're
better, but you seem to me to have been wound up
by some key that isn't kept by your governess or your
confessor or even your mother, but that you wear by
a fine black ribbon round your own neck. Little
persons in my day — when they were stupid they were
very docile, but when they were clever they were very
sly ! You're clever enough, I imagine, and yet if I
guessed all your secrets at this moment is there one
I should have to frown at ? I can tell you a wickeder
one than any you've discovered for yourself. If you
wish to live at ease in the doux fays de France don't
trouble too much about the key of your conscience or
even about your conscience itself — I mean your own
particular one. You'll fancy it saying things it won't
help your case to hear. They'll make you sad, and
when you're sad you'll grow plain, and when you're
plain you'll grow bitter, and when you're bitter you'll
be feu aimable. I was brought up to think that

899



HENRY JAMES

a woman's first duty is to be infinitely so, and the
happiest women I've known have been in fact those
who performed this duty faithfully. As you're not
a Catholic I suppose you can't be a devote ; and if
you don't take life as a fifty years' mass the only way
to take it 's as a game of skill. Listen to this. Not to
lose at the game of life you must — I don't say cheat,
but not be too sure your neighbour won't, and not be
shocked out of your self-possession if he does. Don't
lose, my dear — I beseech you don't lose. Be neither
suspicious nor credulous, and if you find your neighbour
peeping don't cry out ; only very politely wait your
own chance. I've had my revenge more than once in
my day, but I really think the sweetest I could take,
en somme, against the past I've known, would be to
have your blest innocence profit by my experience.'

Madame de Mauves

516 The 'Pont du Qard

THE ravine is the valley of the Gardon, which the
road from Nimes has followed some time without
taking account of it, but which, exactly at the right
distance from the aqueduct, deepens and expands and
puts on those characteristics which are best suited to
give it effect. The gorge becomes romantic, still, and
solitary, and, with its white rocks and wild shrubbery,
hangs over the clear-coloured river, in whose slow
course there is, here and there, a deeper pool. Over
the valley, from side to side and ever so high in the air,
stretch the three tiers of the tremendous bridge. They
are unspeakably imposing, and nothing could well be
more Roman. The hugeness, the solidity, the un-
expectedness, the monumental rectitude of the whole
900



HENRY JAMES

thing leave you nothing to say — at the time — and make
you stand gazing. You simply feel that it is noble and
perfect, that it has the quality of greatness. A road,
branching from the highway, descends to the level of
the river and passes under one of the arches. This
road has a wide margin of grass and loose stones,
which slopes upward into the bank of the ravine.
You may sit here as long as you please, staring up at
the light, strong piers ; the spot is sufficiently ' wild ',
though two or three stone benches have been erected
on it. I remained there an hour and got a complete
impression , the place was perfectly soundless and,
for the time at least, lonely ; the splendid afternoon
had begun to fade, and there was a fascination in the
object I had come to see. It came to pass that at
the same time I discovered in it a certain stupidity,
a vague brutality That element is rarely absent from
great Roman work, which is wanting in the nice
adaptation of the means to the end. The means are
always exaggerated ; the end is so much more than
attained. The Roman rigour was apt to overshoot
the mark, and I suppose a race which could do nothing
small is as defective as a race that can do nothing great.
Of this Roman rigour the Pont du Gard is an admir-
able example. It would be a great injustice, however,
not to insist upon its beauty — a kind of manly beauty,
that of an object constructed not to please but to
serve, and impressive simply from the scale on which
it carries out this intention. The number of arches
in each tier is different ; they are smaller and more
numerous as they ascend. The preservation of the
thing is extraordinary ; nothing has crumbled or
collapsed ; every feature remains, and the huge
blocks of stone, of a brownish-yellow (as if they had

901



HENRY JAMES

been baked by the Provencal sun for eighteen centuries),
pile themselves, without mortar or cement, as evenly
as the day they were laid together. All this to carry
the water of a couple of springs to a little provincial
city ! The conduit on the top has retained its shape
and traces of the cement with which it was lined.
When the vague twilight began to gather, the lonely
valley seemed to fill itself with the shadow of the
Roman name, as if the mighty empire were still as
erect as the supports of the aqueduct ; and it was
open to a solitary tourist, sitting there sentimental, to
believe that no people has ever been, or will ever be,
as great as that, measured, as we measure the greatness
of an individual, by the push they gave to what they
undertook. The Pont du Gard is one of the three or
four deepest impressions they have left ; it speaks of
them in a manner with which they might have been
satisfied.

A Ltttle Tour in France

ROBERT BRIDGES

1844-

517 The Quest

(Adapting the version of Edward Bouveru Pusey, 1800-1882)

A ND what is this ? I asked the earth and it said,
J\. ' I am not He ' : and whatsoever is in it confessed
the same. I asked the sea and the deeps, and all that
swimming or creeping live therein, and they answered
4 We are not thy God, seek above us '. I asked the
wandering winds ; and the whole air with his in-
habitants spoke ' Anasimenes was deceived, I am not
God '. I asked the heavens, sun, moon and stars,
' Nor (say they) are we the God whom thou seekest '.
902



ROBERT BRIDGES



And I replied unto all those things which encompass

the door of my flesh, ' Ye have told me of my God,

that ye are not he : tell me something of him '. And

they cried all with a great voice, ' He made us '. My

questioning them was my mind's desire, and their

Beauty was their answer.

From the Confessions of S. Augustine :
included in The Spirit of Man

518 zA School ^Portrait

I HAD not visited Eton for many years, when one
day passing from the Fellows' Library into the
Gallery I caught sight of the portrait of my school-
friend Digby Dolben hanging just without the door
among our most distinguished contemporaries. I was
wholly arrested, and as I stood gazing on it, my com-
panion asked me if I knew who it was. I was thinking
that, beyond a few whom I could name, I must be
almost the only person who would know. Far memories
of my boyhood were crowding freshly upon me : he
was standing again beside me in the eager promise of
his youth ; I could hear his voice ; nothing of him
was changed ; while I, wrapt from him in a confused
mist of time, was wondering what he would think,
could he know that at this actual moment he would
have been dead thirty years, and that his memory
would be thus preserved and honoured in the beloved
school, where his delicate spirit had been so strangely
troubled.

This portrait-gallery of old Etonians is very select :
preeminent distinction of birth or merit may win you
a place there, or again official connection with the
school, which rightly loves to keep up an unbroken

9°3



ROBERT BRIDGES



panorama of its teachers, and to vivify its annals with
the faces and figures of the personalities who carried
on its traditions. But how came Dolben there ? It
was because he was a poet, — that I knew ; — and yet his
poems were not known ; they were jealously guarded
by his family and a few friends : indeed such of his
poems as could have come to the eyes of the authorities
who sanctioned this memorial would not justify it.
There was another reason ; and the portrait bears its
own credentials ; for though you might not perhaps
divine the poet in it, you can see the saint, the soul rapt
in contemplation, the habit of stainless life, of devotion,
of enthusiasm for high ideals. Such a being must have
stood out conspicuously among his fellows ; the facts
of his life would have been the ground of the faith in
his genius ; and when his early death endeared and
sanctified his memory, loving grief would generously
grant him the laurels which he had never worn.

Memoir prefixed to Poems of Dtgby Machworth Dolben

ANDREW LANG

1844-1912

5x9 lAucassiri 's Qhoice

' T7AIR Sir,' said the Captain, ' let these things be.

JT Nicolete is a captive that I did bring from a
strange country. Yea, I bought her at my own charges
of the Saracens, and I bred her up and baptised her,
and made her my daughter in God. And I have
cherished her, and one of these days I would have given
her a young man, to win her bread honourably. With
this hast thou naught to make, but do thou take the
daughter of a King or a Count. Nay more, what
wouldst thou deem thee to have gained, hadst thou
904



ANDREW LANG



made her thy leman, and taken her to thy bed?
Plentiful lack of comfort hadst thou got thereby, for in
Hell would thy soul have lain while the world endures,
and into Paradise wouldst thou have entered never.'

' In Paradise what have I to win f Therein I seek
not to enter, but only to have Nicolete, my sweet
lady that I love so well. For into Paradise go none
but such folk as I shall tell thee now : Thither go
these same old priests, and halt old men and maimed,
who all day and night cower continually before the
altars, and in the crypts ; and such folk as wear old
amices and old clouted frocks, and naked folk and
shoeless, and covered with sores, perishing of hunger
and thirst, and of cold, and of little ease. These be
they that go into Paradise, with them have I naught
to make. But into Hell would I fain go ; for into
Hell fare the goodly clerks, and goodly knights that
fall in tourneys and great wars, and stout men-at-arms,
and all men noble. With these would I licfly go.
And thither pass the sweet ladies and courteous that
have two lovers, or three, and their lords also thereto.
Thither goes the gold, and the silver, and cloth of
vair, and cloth of gris, and harpers, and makers, and
the prince of this world. With these I would gladly
go, let me but have with me, Nicolete, my sweetest



520 Saint <sAugustine 'Robs an Orchard



■ nothing more dreadful than the robbery of an
orchard ! Pears he had in plenty, none the less he
went, with a band of roisterers, and pillaged another



lady.'



Aucassm and NuoUle




most bitterly was



ANDREW LANG



man's pear tree. ' I loved the sin, not that which
I obtained by the same, but I loved the sin itself/
There lay the sting of it ! They were not even
unusually excellent pears. ' A Peare tree ther was,
neere our vineyard, heavy loaden with fruite, which
tempted not greatly either the sight or tast. To the
shaking and robbing thereof, certaine most wicked
youthes (whereof I was one) went late one night.
We carried away huge burthens of fruit from thence,
not for our owne eating, but to be cast before the

Oh, moonlit night of Africa, and orchard by those
wild seabanks where once Dido stood ; oh, laughter
of boys among the shaken leaves, and sound of falling
fruit ; how do you live alone out of so many nights
that no man remembers ? For Carthage is destroyed,
indeed, and forsaken of the sea, yet that one hour of
summer is to be unforgotten while man has memory
of the story of his past.

Adventures among Books

521 Izaak Walton

CIRCUMSTANCES and inclination combined to
make Walton choose the fallentis semita vitae.
Without ambition, save to be in the society of good
men, he passed through turmoil, ever companioned
by content. For him existence had its trials : he saw
all that he held most sacred overthrown ; laws broken
up ; his king publicly murdered ; his friends outcasts ;
his worship proscribed ; he himself suffered in property
from the raid of the Kirk into England. He underwent
many bereavements : child after child he lost, but
content he did not lose, nor sweetness of heart, nor
906



ANDREW LANG



belief. His was one of those happy characters which
are never found disassociated from unquestioning
faith. Of old he might have been the ancient religious
Athenian in the opening of Plato's Republic, or Virgil's
aged gardener. The happiness of such natures would
be incomplete without religion, but only by such
tranquil and blessed souls can religion be accepted
with no doubt or scruple, no dread, and no misgiving.
In his preface to Thealma and Clearcbus Walton
writes, and we may use his own words about his own
works : ' The Reader will here find such various
events and rewards of innocent Truth and undis-
sembled Honesty, as is like to leave in him (if he be
a good-natured reader) more sympathising and virtuous
impressions, than ten times so much time spent in
impertinent, critical and needless disputes about
religion.' Walton relied on authority ; on ' plain,
unperplexed catechism '. In an age of the strangest
and most dissident theological speculations, an age of
Quakers, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Fifth Monarchy
Men, Covenanters, Independents, Gibbites, Presby-
terians, and what not, Walton was true to the authority
of the Church of England, with no prejudice against
the ancient Catholic faith. As Gesner was his authority
for pickerel weed begetting pike, so the Anglican
bishops were security for Walton's creed.

To him, if we may say so, it was easy to be saved,
while Bunyan, a greater humorist, could be saved
only in following a path that skirted madness, and
' as by fire '. To Bunyan, Walton would have seemed
a figure like his own Ignorance ; a pilgrim who never
stuck in the Slough of Despond, nor met Apollyon
in the Valley of the Shadow, nor was captive in
Doubting Castle, nor stoned in Vanity Fair. And of

907



ANDREW LANG



Bunyan, Walton would have said that he was among
those Nonconformists who ' might be sincere, well-
meaning men, whose indiscreet zeal might be so like
charity, as thereby to cover a multitude of errors '. To
Walton there seemed spiritual solace in remember-
ing ' that we have comforted and been helpful to
a dejected or distressed family '. Bunyan would have
regarded this belief as a heresy, and (theoretically)
charitable deeds ' as filthy rags '. Differently con-
stituted, these excellent men accepted religion in
different ways. Christian bows beneath a burden of
sin ; Piscator beneath a basket of trout. Let us be
grateful for the diversities of human nature, and the
dissimilar paths which lead Piscator and Christian
alike to the City not built with hands. Both were
seekers for a City which to have sought through life,
in patience, honesty, loyalty, and love, is to hare
found it. Of Walton's book we may say :

Laudis amore tumes ? Sunt certa ptacula quae te
Ter pure lecto poterunt recreate hbello.

Essay on haak W alton

WILLIAM CLARK RUSSELL

1844-1911

522 The Last of the Qrosvenor

THE boatswain shoved the boat's head off, and we
each shipped an oar and pulled the boat about
a quarter of a mile away from the ship ; and then,
from a strange and wild curiosity to behold the ship
sink, and still in our hearts clinging to her, not only
as the home wherein we had found shelter for many
days past, but as the only visible object in all the
908



WILLIAM CLARK RUSSELL

stupendous reach of waters, we threw in the oars
and sat watching her. . .

Few sailors can behold the ship in which they have
sailed sinking before their eyes without the same
emotion of distress and pity almost which the spectacle
of a drowning man excites in them. She has grown
a familiar name, a familiar object ; thus far she has
borne them in safety ; she has been rudely beaten,
and yet has done her duty ; but the tempest has
broken her down at last ; all the beauty is shorn
from her ; she is weary with the long and dreadful
struggle with the vast forces that Nature arrayed
against her ; she sinks, a desolate, abandoned thing
in mid-ocean, carrying with her a thousand memories,
which surge up m the heart with the pain of a strong
man's tears. . .

The sun was now quite close to the horizon, branding
the ocean with a purple glare, but itself descending
into a cloudless sky. I cannot express how majestic
and wonderful the great orb looked to us who were
almost level with the water. Its disc seemed vaster
than I had ever before seen it, and there was some-
thing sublimely solemn in the loneliness of its descent.
All the sky about it, and far to the south and north,
was changed into the colour of gold by its lustre ;
and over our heads the heavens were an exquisite
tender green, which melted in the east into a dark
blue.

I was telling Mary that ere the sun sank again we
might be on board a ship, and whispering any words
of encouragement and hope to her, when I was startled
by the boatswain crying, ' Now she 's gone ! Look
at her ! ' I turned my eyes towards the ship, and
could scarcely credit my senses when I found that

909



WILLIAM CLARK RUSSELL



her hull had vanished, and that nothing was to be
seen of her but her spars, which were all aslant stern-
wards.

I held my breath as I saw the masts sink lower
and lower. First the cross jack-yard was submerged,
then the gaff with the ensign hanging dead at the
peak, then the mainyard ; presently only the main-
topmast cross-trees were visible, a dark cross upon
the water : they vanished ; at the same moment the
sun disappeared behind the horizon ; and now we
were alone on the great breathing deep, with all the
eastern sky growing dark as we watched.

' It 's all over ! ' said the boatswain, breaking the
silence, and speaking in a hollow tone. ' No livin'
man'll ever see the Grosvenor agin ! '

The Wreck of the Grosvenor

GEORGE SAINTSBURY

1845-

523 The Death of <£Molihre

MOLIERE was not old ; he was almost exactly
the age of Shakespeare when he too died — less
' tragically ', as they say, but also with a parcel of work
done, such as makes it, though natural, almost absurd
to wish for more. As for the ' tragedy ', there was, it
may seem to a sober and not too obtuse judgment,
little for tears here, little to wail, except in so far as
' the end ' is always sad. If God has given you brains,
and courage, and the upward countenance ; if you
have loved ; if you have had your day and lived your
life, what more do you want ? Moli£re had had and
done all this. And as for dying in his vocation, Nelson
and he and that saintly hero of Rotrou who elected
910



GEORGE SAINTSBURY



' mourir debout et dans son rang ', may possibly appeal
together to a tribunal which does not judge according
to the standard of the Puritan and the Pharisee.

Introduction to the Plays of Mohere

FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY

1846-1924

524 Ifeason and Ideality

WHAT is it guarantees this presumed identity of
truth and fact ? We have an instinct, no doubt,
that leads us to believe in it, but our instincts, if they
can not be in error, may at least be mistranslated and
misunderstood. And here we seem placed between
rival promptings, that contend for mastery over our
reason. It is an old preconception that reality and
truth must contain the same movement of a single
content that, by itself not intellectual, then doubles
itself in the glass of reflection. On the other hand it
is a certain result that our intellect and the movement
of our intellect's content is abstract and discursive,
a mere essence distilled from our senses' abundance.
And this certainty has inspired an opposite conclusion.
Since the rational and the real in truth must be one,
and since these vital essences are the life of our reason,
then, despite of seeming, the reality too must consist
and must live in them. If the real becomes truth,
then so without doubt the truth must be real.

In the face of these promptings, I must venture to
doubt whether both have not branched from one stem
of deceit, whether truth, if that stands for the work of
the intellect, is ever precisely 1 identical with fact, or
claims in the end to possess such identity. To the
1 precisely is here emphatic

911



FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY

arguments urged by the reason, and which demonstrate
that an element which is not intelligible is nothing,
I possibly might not find an intelligible reply. But
I comfort my mind with the thought that if myself,
when most truly myself, were pure intelligence, I at
least am not likely to survive the discovery, or be
myself when I wake from a pleasant delusion. And
perhaps it may stand with the philosopher's reason, as
it stood with the sculptor who moulded the lion.
When in the reason's philosophy the rational appears
dominant and sole possessor of the world, we can only
wonder what place would be left to it, if the element
excluded might break through the charm of the magic
circle, and, without growing rational, could find
expression. Such an idea may be senseless, and such
a thought may contradict itself, but it serves to give
voice to an obstinate instinct. Unless thought stands
for something that falls beyond mere intelligence, if
' thinking ' is not used with some strange implication
that never was part of the meaning of the word,
a lingering scruple still forbids us to believe that reality
can ever be purely 1 rational. It may come from a failure
in my metaphysics, or from a weakness of the flesh
which continues to blind me, but the notion that
existence 1 could be the same as understanding strikes
as cold and ghost-like as the dreariest materialism.
That the glory of this world in the end is appearance
leaves the world more glorious, if we feel it is a show
of some fuller splendour ; but the sensuous curtain is
a deception and a cheat, if it hides some colourless
movement of atoms, some spectral woof of impalpable
abstractions, or unearthly ballet of bloodless categories.
Though dragged to such conclusions, we can not
i purely is here emphatic » existence here=reality

912



FRANCIS HERBERT BRADLEY



embrace them. Our principles may be true, but they
are not reality. They no more make that Whole which
commands our devotion, than some shredded dissec-
tion of human tatters is that warm and breathing
beauty of flesh which our hearts found delightful.

The Principles of Logic

ARCHIBALD PHILIP PRIMROSE
EARL OF ROSEBERY

1847-

525 The Elder and the Younger Titt

IT is perhaps unnecessary to say more of the circum-
stances and surroundings of Pitt. But it is im-
possible to complete any sketch of his career, or indeed
to form an adequate estimate of his character, without
setting him, if only for a moment, by the side of
Chatham. Not merely are they father and son ; not
merely are they the most conspicuous English Ministers
of the eighteenth century ; but their characters
illustrate each other. And yet it is impossible for men
to be more different. Pitt was endowed with mental
powers of the first order ; his readiness, his apprehen-
sion, his resource were extraordinary ; the daily
parliamentary demand on his brain and nerve power
he met with serene and inexhaustible affluence ; his
industry, administrative activity, and public spirit
were unrivalled, it was perhaps impossible to carry
the force of sheer ability further ; he was a por-
tent. Chatham in most of these respects was inferior
to his son. He was a political mystic ; sometimes
sublime, sometimes impossible, and sometimes insane.
But he had genius. It was that fitful and unde-
finable inspiration that gave to his eloquence a

913



EARL OF ROSEBERY



piercing and terrible note which no other English
eloquence has touched; that made him the idol of
his countrymen, though they could scarcely be said
to have seen his face or heard his voice or read his
speeches ; that made him a watchword among those
distant insurgents whose wish for independence he
yet ardently opposed ; that made each remotest
soldier and bluejacket feel when he was in office that
there was a man in Downing Street, and a man whose
eye penetrated everywhere ; that made his name at
orice an inspiration and a dread ; that cowed the
tumultuous Commons at his frown. Each Pitt
possessed in an eminent degree the qualities which the
other most lacked : one was formed by nature for
peace, the other for war. Chatham could not have
filled Pitt's place in the ten years which followed
1783 : but, from the time that war was declared, the
guidance of Chatham would have been worth an army.
No country could have too many Pitts : the more she
has the greater will she be. But no country could
afford the costly and splendid luxury of many
Chathams. p t u

RICHARD JEFFERIES

1848-1887

526 The Wheat

i

IF you will look at a grain of wheat you will see that
it seems folded up : it has crossed its arms and rolled
itself up in a cloak, a fold of which forms a groove, and
so gone to sleep. If you look at it some time, as people
in the old enchanted days used to look into a mirror,
or the magic ink, until they saw living figures therein,
you can almost trace a miniature human being in the
914



RICHARD JEFFERIES

oval of the grain. It is narrow at the top, where the
head would be, and broad across the shoulders, and
narrow again down towards the feet ; a tiny man or
woman has wrapped itself round about with a garment
and settled to slumber. Up in the far north, where
the dead ice reigns, our arctic explorers used to roll
themselves in a sleeping-bag like this, to keep the
warmth in their bodies against the chilliness of the
night. Down in the south, where the heated sands
of Egypt never cool, there in the rock-hewn tombs
lie the mummies wrapped and lapped and wound about
with a hundred yards of linen, in the hope, it may be,
that spices and balm might retain within the sarco-
phagus some small fragment of human organism
through endless ages, till at last the gift of life revisited
it. Like a grain of wheat the mummy is folded in its
cloth. And I do not know really whether I might not
say that these little grains of English corn do not hold
within them the actual flesh and blood of man.
Transubstantiation is a fact there.

Sometimes the grains are dry and shrivelled and hard
as shot, sometimes they are large and full and have
a juiciness about them, sometimes they are a little bit
red, others are golden, many white. The sack stands
open in the market — you can thrust your arm in it
a foot deep, or take up a handful and let it run back
like a liquid stream, or hold it in your palm and
balance it, feeling the weight. They are not very heavy
as they lie in the palm, yet these little grains are
a ponderous weight that rules man's world. Wherever
they are there is empire. Could imperial Rome have
only grown sufficient wheat in Italy to have fed her
legions Caesar would still be master of three-fourths
of the earth. Rome thought more in her latter days

915



RICHARD JEFFERIES

of grapes and oysters and mullets, that change colour
as they die, and singing girls and flute-playing, and
cynic verse of Horace — anything rather than corn.
Rome is no more, and the lords of the world are they
who have mastership of wheat. We have the master-
ship at this hour by dint of our gold and our hundred-
ton guns, but they are telling our farmers to cast aside
their corn, and to grow tobacco and fruit and anything
else that can be thought of in preference. The gold
is slipping away. These sacks in the market open to
all to thrust their hands in are not sacks of corn but of
golden sovereigns, half-sovereigns, new George and the
dragon, old George and the dragon, Sydney mint
sovereigns, Napoleons, half-Napoleons, Belgian gold,
German gold, Italian gold ; gold scraped and scratched
and gathered together like old rags from door to door.
Sacks full of gold. . .

ti

The great field you see was filled with gold corn four
feet deep as a pitcher is filled with water to the brim. Of
yore the rich man is said, in the Roman classic, to have
measured his money, so here you might have measured
it by the rood. The sunbeams sank deeper and deeper
into the wheatears, layer upon layer of light, and the
colour deepened by these daily strokes. There was no
bulletin to tell the folk of its progress, no Nileometer
to mark the rising flood of the wheat to its hour of
overflow. Yet there went through the village a sense
of expectation, and men said to each other, ' We shall
be there soon '. No one knew the day — the last day
of doom of the golden race ; every one knew it was
nigh. One evening there was a small square piece cut
at one side, a little notch, and two shocks stood there
916



RICHARD JEFFERIES

in the twilight. Next day the village sent forth its
army with their crooked weapons to cut and slay. It
used to be an era, let me tell you, when a great farmer
gave the signal to his reapers ; not a man, woman, or
child that did not talk of that. Well-to-do people
stopped their vehicles and walked out into the new
stubble. Ladies came, farmers, men of low degree,
everybody — all to exchange a word or two with the
workers. These were so terribly in earnest at the start
they could scarcely acknowledge the presence even of
the squire. They felt themselves so important, and
were so full, and so intense and one-minded in their
labour, that the great of the earth might come and
go as sparrows for aught they cared. More men and
more men were put on day by day, and women to
bind the sheaves, till the vast field held the village,
yet they seemed but a handful buried in the tunnels
of the golden mine : they were lost in it like the hares,
for as the wheat fell, the shocks rose behind them,
low tents of corn. Your skin or mine could not have
stood the scratching of the straw, which is stiff and
sharp, and the burning of the sun, which blisters like
red-hot iron. No one could stand the harvest-field
as a reaper except he had been born and cradled in
a cottage, and passed his childhood bareheaded in
July heats and January snows. Field and Hedgerow

EDMUND GOSSE

1849-

527 Oddkombe Qhapel

BEFORE our coming, a little flock of persons met
in the Room, a community of the indefinite sort
just then becoming frequent in the West of England,

gi 7



EDMUND GOSSE

pious rustics connected with no other recognized
body of Christians, and depending directly on the
independent study of the Bible. . . The origin of
the meeting had been odd. A few years before we
came a crew of Cornish fishermen, quite unknown to
the villagers, were driven by stress of weather into the
haven under the cliff. They landed, and, instead
of going to a public-house, they looked about for a
room where they could hold a prayer-meeting. They
were devout Wesleyans ; they had come from the open
sea, they were far from home, and they had been
starved by lack of their customary religious privileges.
As they stood about in the street before their meeting,
they challenged the respectable girls who came out to
stare at them, with the question, ' Do you love the
Lord Jesus, my maid ? ' Receiving dubious answers,
they pressed the inhabitants to come in and pray with
them, which several did. Ann Burmington, who long
afterwards told me about it, was one of those girls, and
she repeated that the fishermen said, ' What a dreadful
thing it will be, at the Last Day, when the Lord says,
" Come, ye blessed," and says it not to you, and then
" Depart, ye cursed," and you maidens have to
depart.' They were finely-built young men, with
black beards and shining eyes, and I do not question
that some flash of sex unconsciously mingled with the
curious episode, although their behaviour was in all
respects discreet. It was, perhaps, not wholly a
coincidence that almost all those particular girls
remained unmarried to the end of their lives. After
two or three days, the fishermen went off to sea again.
They prayed and sailed away, and the girls, who had
not even asked their names, never heard of them again.
But several of the young women were definitely con-
918



EDMUND GOSSE

verted, and they formed the nucleus of our little
gathering. Father and Son

WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY

1849-1903

528 Other Sea-T'oets and Longfellow

THE ocean as confidant, a Laertes that can neither
avoid his Hamlets nor bid them hold their peace, is
a modern invention. Byron and Shelley discovered
it ; Heine took it into his confidence, and told it the
story of his loves ; Wordsworth made it a moral
influence ; Browning loved it in his way, but his way
was not often the poet's ; to Matthew Arnold it was
the voice of destiny, and its message was a message
of despair ; Hugo conferred with it as with an humble
friend, and uttered such lofty things over it as are
rarely heard upon the lips of man. And so with living
lyrists each after his kind. . .

But to Longfellow alone was it given to see that
stately galley which Count Arnaldos saw ; his only
to hear the steersman singing that wild and wondrous
song which none that hears it can resist, and none that
has heard it may forget. Then did he learn the old
monster's secret — the word of his charm, the core of
his mystery, the human note in his music, the quality
of his influence upon the heart and the mind of man ;
and then did he win himself a place apart among
sea-poets. With the most of them it is a case of Ego
et rex mens : It is I and the sea, and my egoism is
as valiant and as vocal as the other's. But Longfellow
is the spokesman of a confraternity ; what thrills him
to utterance is the spirit of that strange and beautiful

919



WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY



freemasonry established as long ago as when the first
sailor steered the first keel out into the unknown, irre-
sistible water-world, and so established the founda-
tions of the eternal brotherhood of man with ocean.
To him the sea is a place of mariners and ships. In
his verse the rigging creaks, the white sail fills and
crackles, there are blown smells of pine and hemp
and tar ; you catch the home wind on your cheeks ;
and old shipmen, their eyeballs white in their bronzed
faces, with silver rings and gaudy handkerchiefs, come
in and tell you moving stories of the immemorial,
incommunicable deep. He abides in a port ; he goes
down to the docks, and loiters among the galiots and
brigantines ; he hears the melancholy song of the
chanty-men ; he sees the chips flying under the ship-
wright's adze ; he smells the pitch that smokes and
bubbles in the caldron. And straightway he falls to
singing his variations on the ballad of Count Arnaldos ;
and the world listens, for its heart beats in his song.

Virdis and Reviews : Literature

529 c Raeburn

THE material Raeburn found in his native place
was of the finest quality. The blessing of the
Union was everywhere apparent, but Scotland was
not yet Anglicized, and Edinburgh was still her capital
in fact as well as in name. As the city at once of
Walter Scott and of the Great Unknown, it was a
metropolis of poetry and fiction ; as the city of
Jeffrey and Maga, it was a centre of so-called criticism ;
as the city of Raeburn and John Thomson, it was
a high place of portraiture and landscape ; as the city
of Archibald Constable and the Ballantynes, it was
920



WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY

a headquarters of bookselling and printing. It was
the city of Reid and Dugald Stewart, of Erskine and
Henry Dundas, of John Home and Henry Mackenzie,
of Braxfield and Newton and Clerk of Eldin, of Francis
Horner and Neil Gow ; and as Raeburn painted the
most of these — and indeed there was scarce an eminent
Scotsman but sat to him — his achievement may be
said to mirror some thirty years of the Scots nation's
life. Scarce anywhere could he have found better
models ; which, for their part, were thrice fortunate
in their painter. Honourable as were his beginnings,
they scarce gave earnest of the results of his later years.
His genius, essentially symmetrical and sane, did but
mature with time ; artistic from the first, his accom-
plishment was finest at his death ; his vision was at
its keenest in his latest efforts ; his life, in fine, was
a piece of work as sound and healthy and manly as his
art. Thus : ' he is said to have lost a great deal of
money by becoming security for a relative, but he
bore his loss with great composure, and painted no
more industriously after than before ' ; he spent
much of his leisure in ' mechanics and natural philo-
sophy ' ; he practised sculpture — it is said that when
he was studying under Michelangelo in Rome, he came
near to preferring it before painting — with a certain
diligence ; he ' excelled ', says his biographer, ' at
archery, golf, and other Scottish exercises ' ; he laid
out and built ' on so judicious and tasteful a plan ' that
his estate became in no great while ' the most extensive
suburb attached to Edinburgh ' ; he was an excellent
talker ; he appears to have been singularly fortunate
in his domestic relations ; he enjoyed the friendship
as he commanded the admiration of the most dis-
tinguished men of his time ; his health was perfect ;

921



WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY



he stood upwards of six foot two in his boots ; ' it
may be added that, while engaged in painting, his
step and attitudes were at once stately and graceful '.
His character and his career, indeed, have all the
balance, the unity, the symmetrical completeness, of
his genius and his achievement ; and the rhythm to
which they moved — large, dignified, consummate :
like that of a Handelian chorus — remained unbroken
until the end. It came in 1823. He was now a man
of sixty-seven ; his health was apparently imperturb-
able ; with Scott and Adam and Shepherd, he had
been for some years in the habit of ' interposing a
parenthesis into the chapter of public business for the
purpose of visiting objects of historical interest and
curiosity ' ; and this year he had not only ' visited
with enthusiasm the ancient ruins of St. Andrews,
of Pittenweem, and other remains of antiquity ', but
had also ' contributed much to the hilarity of the
party '. Returning to Edinburgh, he had been
honoured with a sitting from Sir Walter, of whom
he was anxious to finish two presentments, one for
himself and one for Lord Montagu ; and ' within
a day or two afterwards ' he was ' suddenly affected
with a general decay and debility ', — a condition ' not
accompanied by any visible complaint '. He lingered
no more than a week ; and so it befell that the portrait
of the author of W averley was the last to make any
call upon a capacity of brain and hand unequalled in
that owner's day. Thus does Scotland work : she
has the genius of fitness, so that to the world without
her achievement seems ever instinct with the very
spirit of romance. There are two great artists in the
Edinburgh of 1823, and the one dies painting the other
(the fact remains ' a subject of affectionate regret '
922



WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY



to the survivor). I think of Hugo — of the Je crois en
Dieu of his last will and testament, his careful provision
of a pauper's hearse. And I revert with pride and
gratitude to the supreme experience of this august
pair of friends.

Views and Reviews : Art

AUGUSTINE BIRRELL

1850-

530 "John Wesley 's 'Journal

WHERE the reader of the Journal will be shocked
is when his attention is called to the public side
of the country — to the state of the gaols, to Newgate,
to Bethlehem, to the criminal code, to the brutality
of so many of the judges and the harshness of the
magistrates, to the supineness of the bishops, to the
extinction in high places of the missionary spirit — in
short, to the heavy slumber of humanity.

Wesley was full of compassion — of a compassion
wholly free from hysterics and credulity. In public
affairs his was the composed zeal of a Howard. His
efforts to penetrate the dark places were long in vain.
He says in his dry way : ' They won't let me go to
Bedlam because they say I make the inmates mad, or
into Newgate because I make them wicked.' The
reader of the Journal will be at no loss to see what these
sapient magistrates meant. Wesley was a terribly
exciting preacher, quiet though his manner was. He
pushed matters home without flinching. He made
people cry out and fall down, nor did it surprise
him that they should. You will find some strange
biographies in the Journal. Consider that of John

923



AUGUSTINE BIRRELL



Lancaster for a moment. He was a young fellow who
fell into bad company, stole some velvet, and was
sentenced to death, and lay for awhile in Newgate
awaiting his hour. A good Methodist woman, Sarah
Peters, obtained permission to visit him, though the
fever was raging in the prison at the time. Lancaster
had no difficulty in collecting six or seven other
prisoners, all like himself waiting to be strangled, and
Sarah Peters prayed with them and sang hymns, the
clergy of the diocese being otherwise occupied. When
the eve of their execution arrived, the poor creatures
begged that Sarah Peters might be allowed to remain
with them to continue her exhortations ; but this
could not be. In her absence, however, they contrived
to console one another, for that devilish device of
a later age, solitary confinement, was then unknown.
When the bellman came round at midnight to tell
them, ' Remember you are to die to-day,' they cried
out : ' Welcome news — welcome news ! ' How they
met their deaths you can read for yourselves in the
Journal, which concludes the narrative with a true
eighteenth-century touch : ' John Lancaster's body
was carried away by a company hired by the surgeons,
but a crew of sailors pursued them, took it from them
by force, and delivered it to his mother, by which
means it was decently interred in the presence of many
who praised God on his behalf.'

If you want to get into the last century, to feel its
pulses throb beneath your finger, be content sometimes
to leave the letters of Horace Walpole unturned,
resist the drowsy temptation to waste your time over
the learned triflers who sleep in the seventeen volumes
of Nichols — nay, even deny yourself your annual
reading of Boswell or your biennial retreat with Sterne,
924



AUGUSTINE BIRRELL



and ride up and down the country with the greatest
force of the eighteenth century in England

No man lived nearer the centre than John Wesley,
neither Clive nor Pitt, neither Mansfield nor Johnson.
You cannot cut him out of our national life. No single
figure influenced so many minds, no single voice
touched so many hearts. No other man did such
a life's work for England. As a writer he has not
achieved distinction. He was no Athanasius, no
Augustine. He was ever a preacher and an organizer,
a labourer in the service of humanity ; but, happily
for us, his Journals remain, and from them we can
learn better than from anywhere else what manner of
man he was, and the character of the times during
which he lived and moved and had his being.

Miscellanies



FREDERIC WILLIAM MAITLAND

1850-1906

531 The Voice of the ^Majority

ONE of the great books that remain to be written
is The History of the Majority. Our habit of
treating the voice of a majority as equivalent to the
voice of an all is so deeply engrained that we hardly
think that it has a history. But a history it has, and
there is fiction there : not fiction if that term implies
falsehood or caprice, but a slow extension of old words
and old thoughts beyond the old facts. In the earlier
middle ages it is unanimity that is wanted ; it is
unanimity that is chronicled ; it is unanimity that
is after a sort obtained. A shout is the test, and in form
it is the primary test today in the House of Commons.

925



FREDERIC WILLIAM MAITLAND



But the few should not go on shouting when they
know that they are few. If they do, measures can be
taken to make them hold their peace. In the end the
assembly has but one voice, one audible voice ; it is
unanimous. The transition to a process which merely
counts heads or hands is the slower because in some
manner that no arithmetic can express the voices of
the older, wiser, more worshipful, more substantial
men are the weightiest. The disputed, the double
elections that we read of in every quarter, from the
papal and imperial downwards, tell a very curious story
of constitutional immaturity. But until men will say
plainly that a vote carried by a majority of one is for
certain purposes every whit as effectual as an unanimous
vote, one main contrast between corporate ownership
and mere community escapes them.

Township and Borough

LAFCADIO HEARN

i 850- 1 904

532 zA 'Japanese Qarden

NO effort to create an impossible or purely ideal
landscape is made in the Japanese garden. Its
artistic purpose is to copy faithfully the attractions
of a veritable landscape, and to convey the real
impression that a real landscape communicates. It
is therefore at once a picture and a poem ; perhaps
even more a poem than a picture. For as nature's
scenery, in its varying aspects, affects us with sensations
of joy or of solemnity, of grimness or of sweetness, of
force or of peace, so must the true reflection of it in
the labor of the landscape gardener create not merely
an impression of beauty, but a mood in the soul. The
926



LAFCADIO HEARN

grand old landscape gardeners, those Buddhist monks
who first introduced the art into Japan, and subse-
quently developed it into an almost occult science,
carried their theory yet farther than this. They held
it possible to express moral lessons in the design of
a garden, and abstract ideas, such as Chastity, Faith,
Piety, Content, Calm, and Connubial Bliss. There-
fore were gardens contrived according to the character
of the owner, whether poet, warrior, philosopher, or
priest. In those ancient gardens (the art, alas, is
passing away under the withering influence of the
utterly commonplace Western taste) there were
expressed both a mood of nature and some rare
Oriental conception of a mood of man.

I do not know what human sentiment the principal
division of my garden was intended to reflect ; and
there is none to tell me. Those by whom it was made
passed away long generations ago, in the eternal
transmigration of souls. But as a poem of nature it
requires no interpreter. It occupies the front portion
of the grounds, facing south ; and it also extends west
to the verge of the northern division of the garden,
from which it is partly separated by a curious screen-
fence structure. There are large rocks in it, heavily
mossed ; and divers fantastic basins of stone for
holding water ; and stone lamps green with years ;
and a shachihoko, such as one sees at the peaked angles
of castle roofs, — a great stone fish, an idealized por-
poise, with its nose in the ground and its tail in the
air. There are miniature hills, with old trees upon
them ; and there are long slopes of green, shadowed
by flowering shrubs, like river banks ; and there are
green knolls like islets. All these verdant elevations
rise from spaces of pale yellow sand, smooth as a surface

937



LAFCADIO HEARN



of silk and miming the curves and meanderings of
a river course. These sanded spaces are not to be
trodden upon ; they are much too beautiful for that.
The least speck of dirt would mar their effect ; and
it requires the trained skill of an experienced native
gardener — a delightful old man he is — to keep them
in perfect form. But they are traversed in various
directions by lines of flat unhewn rock slabs, placed
at slightly irregular distances from one another, exactly
like stepping-stones across a brook. The whole effect
is that of the shores of a still stream in some lovely,
lonesome, drowsy place.

There is nothing to break the illusion, so secluded
the garden is. High walls and fences shut out streets
and contiguous things ; and the shrubs and the trees,
heightening and thickening toward the boundaries,
conceal from view even the roofs of the neighbouring
katchiu-yashiki. Softly beautiful are the tremulous
shadows of leaves on the sunned sand ; and the scent
of flowers comes thinly sweet with every waft of tepid
air ; and there is a humming of bees.

Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

1850-1894

533 The Snglish n/tdmirals

ALMOST everybody in our land, except humani-
L tarians and a few persons whose youth has been
depressed by exceptionally aesthetic surroundings, can
understand and sympathise with an Admiral or a prize-
fighter. I do not wish to bracket Benbow and Tom
Cribb ; but, depend upon it, they are practically
bracketed for admiration in the minds of many
928



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

frequenters of ale-houses. If you told them about
Germanicus and the eagles, or Regulus going back
to Carthage, they would very likely fall asleep ; but
tell them about Harry Pearce and Jem Belcher, or
about Nelson and the Nile, and they put down their
pipes to listen. I have by me a copy of Boxiana, on
the fly-leaves of which a youthful member of the fancy
kept a chronicle of remarkable events and an obituary
of great men. Here we find piously chronicled the
demise of jockeys, watermen, and pugilists — Johnny
Moore, of the Liverpool Prize Ring ; Tom Spring,
aged fifty-six ; ' Pierce Egan, senior, writer of Boxiana
and other sporting works ' — and among all these, the
Duke of Wellington ! If Benbow had lived in the time
of this annalist, do you suppose his name would not
have been added to the glorious roll? In short, we
do not all feel warmly towards Wesley or Laud, we
cannot all take pleasure in Paradise Lost ; but there
are certain common sentiments and touches of nature
by which the whole nation is made to feel kinship.
A little while ago everybody, from Hazlitt and John
Wilson down to the imbecile creature who scribbled
his register on the fly-leaves of Boxiana, felt a more or
less shamefaced satisfaction in the exploits of prize-
fighters. And the exploits of the Admirals are popular
to the same degree, and tell in all ranks of society.
Their sayings and doings stir English blood like the
sound of a trumpet ; and if the Indian Empire, the
trade of London, and all the outward and visible
ensigns of our greatness should pass away, we should
still leave behind us a durable monument of what we
were in these sayings and doings of the English
Admirals.

Vtrgimbus Puerisqut
2830 H h 929



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON



534 Children

THEY are wheeled in perambulators or dragged
about by nurses in a pleasing stupor. A vague,
faint, abiding wonderment possesses them. Here and
there some specially remarkable circumstance, such as
a water-cart or a guardsman, fairly penetrates into the
seat of thought and calls them, for half a moment, out
of themselves ; and you may see them, still towed
forward sideways by the inexorable nurse as by a sort
of destiny, but still staring at the bright object in
their wake. It may be some minutes before another
such moving spectacle reawakens them to the world
in which they dwell. For other children, they almost
invariably show some intelligent sympathy. ' There
is a fine fellow making mud pies,' they seem to say ;
' that I can understand, there is some sense in mud
pies.' But the doings of their elders, unless where
they are speakingly picturesque or recommend them-
selves by the quality of being easily imitable, they let
them go over their heads (as we say) without the least
regard. If it were not for this perpetual imitation,
we should be tempted to fancy they despised us
outright, or only considered us in the light of creatures
brutally strong and brutally silly ; among whom
they condescended to dwell in obedience like a philo-
sopher at a barbarous court.

Vtrgimbus Puertsque

535 ^Kight among the T'ines

A FAINT wind, more like a moving coolness than
a stream of air, passed down the glade from time
to time ; so that even in my great chamber the air was
being renewed all night long. I thought with horror
93°



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

of the inn at Chasserades and the congregated night-
caps ; with horror of the nocturnal prowesses of clerks
and students, of hot theatres and pass-keys and close
rooms. I have not often enjoyed a more serene
possession of myself, nor felt more independent of
material aids. The outer world, from which we cower
into our houses, seemed after all a gentle habitable
place ; and night after night a man's bed, it seemed,
was laid and waiting for him in the fields, where God
keeps an open house. I thought I had rediscovered
one of those truths which are revealed to savages and
hid from political economists : at the least, I had
discovered a new pleasure for myself. And yet even
while I was exulting in my solitude I became aware
of a strange lack. I wished a companion to he near me
in the starlight, silent and not moving, but ever
within touch. For there is a fellowship more quiet
even than solitude, and which, rightly understood, is
solitude made perfect. And to live out of doors with
the woman a man loves is of all lives the most complete
and free.

As I thus lay, between content and longing, a faint
noise stole towards me through the pines. I thought,
at first, it was the crowing of cocks or the barking of
dogs at some very distant farm ; but steadily and
gradually it took articulate shape in my ears, until I
became aware that a passenger was going by upon the
high-road in the valley, and singing loudly as he went.
There was more of good-will than grace in his per-
formance ; but he trolled with ample lungs ; and the
sound of his voice took hold upon the hillside and set
the air shaking in the leafy glens. I have heard people
passing by night in sleeping cities ; some of them sang ;
one, I remember,' played loudly on the bagpipes. I

931



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON



have heard the rattle of a cart or carriage spring up
suddenly after hours of stillness, and pass, for some
minutes, within the range of my hearing as I lay abed.
There is a romance about all who are abroad in the
black hours, and with something of a thrill we try to
guess their business. But here the romance was
double : first, this glad passenger, lit internally with
wine, who sent up his voice in music through the
night ; and then I, on the other hand, buckled into
my sack, and smoking alone in the pine-woods between
four and five thousand feet towards the stars.

Travels with a Donkey

536 <tA ^Midnight Flitting

ONCE in my own room, I made the customary
motions of undressing, so that I might time
myself ; and when the cycle was complete, set my
tinder-box ready, and blew out my taper. The matter
of an hour afterward I made a light again, put on my
shoes of list that I had worn by my lord's sick-bed,
and set forth into the house to call the voyagers. All
were dressed and waiting — my lord, my lady, Miss
Katharine, Mr. Alexander, my lady's woman Christie ;
and I observed the effect of secrecy even upon quite
innocent persons, that one after another showed in
the chink of the door a face as white as paper. We
slipped out of the side postern into a night of darkness,
scarce broken by a star or two ; so that at first we
groped and stumbled and fell among the bushes. A
few hundred yards up the wood-path Macconochie
was waiting us with a great lantern ; so the rest of
the way we went easy enough, but still in a kind of
guilty silence. A little beyond the abbey the path
932



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

debouched on the main road ; and some quarter of
a mile farther, at the place called Eagles, where the
moors begin, we saw the lights of the two carriages
stand shining by the wayside. Scarce a word or two
was uttered at our parting, and these regarded busi-
ness : a silent grasping of hands, a turning of faces
aside, and the thing was over ; the horses broke into
a trot, the lamplight sped like Will-o'-the-Wisp upon
the broken moorland, it dipped beyond Stony Brae ;
and there were Macconochie and I alone with our
lantern on the road. There was one thing more to
wait for, and that was the reappearance of the coach
upon Cartmore. It seems they must have pulled up
upon the summit, looked back for a last time, and seen
our lantern not yet moved away from the place of
separation. For a lamp was taken from a carriage, and
waved three times up and down by way of a farewell.
And then they were gone indeed, having looked their
last on the kind roof of Durnsdeer, their faces toward
a barbarous country. I never knew before, the great-
ness of that vault of night in which we two poor
serving-men — the one old, and the one elderly — stood
for the first time deserted ; I had never felt before
my own dependency upon the countenance of others.
The sense of isolation burned in my bowels like a fire.
It seemed that we who remained at home were the
true exiles, and that Durrisdeer and Solwayside, and
all that made my country native, its air good to me,
and its language welcome, had gone forth and was far
over the sea with my old masters.

The Master of Ballantrae



933



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON



537 JQrstie

SHE lay tossing in bed that night, besieged with
feverish thoughts. There were dangerous matters
pending, a battle was toward, over the fate of which she
hung in jealousy, sympathy, fear, and alternate loyalty
and disloyalty to either side. Now she was reincarnated
in her niece, and now in Archie. Now she saw, through
the girl's eyes, the youth on his knees to her, heard
his persuasive instances with a deadly weakness, and
received his overmastering caresses. Anon, with a
revulsion, her temper raged to see such utmost favours
of fortune and love squandered on a brat of a girl,
one of her own house, using her own name — a deadly
ingredient — and that ' didna ken her ain mind an'
was as black 's your hat.' Now she trembled lest her
deity should plead in vain, loving the idea of success
for him like a triumph of nature ; anon, with returning
loyalty to her own family and sex, she trembled for
Kirstie and the credit of the Elliotts. And again
she had a vision of herself, the day over for her old-
world tales and local gossip, bidding farewell to her
last link with life and brightness and love ; and behind
and beyond, she saw but the blank butt-end where she
must crawl to die. Had she then come to the lees ?
she, so great, so beautiful, with a heart as fresh as a
girl's and strong as womanhood ? It could not be, and
yet it was so ; and for a moment her bed was horrible
to her as the sides of the grave. And she looked forward
over a waste of hours, and saw herself go on to rage,
and tremble, and be softened, and rage again, until the
day came and the labours of the day must be renewed.

Suddenly she heard feet on the stairs — his feet, and
soon after the sound of a window-sash flung open.
934



ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

She sat up with her heart beating. He had gone to
his room alone, and he had not gone to bed. She
might again have one of her night cracks ; and at
the entrancing prospect, a change came over her mind ;
with the approach of this hope of pleasure, all the
baser metal became immediately obliterated from her
thoughts. She rose, all woman, and all the best of
woman, tender, pitiful, hating the wrong, loyal to her
own sex — and all the weakest of that dear miscellany,
nourishing, cherishing next her soft heart, voicelessly
flattering, hopes that she would have died sooner than
have acknowledged. She tore off her nightcap, and
her hair fell about her shoulders in profusion. Undying
coquetry awoke. By the faint light of her nocturnal
rush, she stood before the looking-glass, carried her
shapely arms above her head, and gathered up the
treasures of her tresses. She was never backward to
admire herself ; that kind of modesty was a stranger
to her nature ; and she paused, struck with a pleased
wonder at the sight. ' Ye daft auld wife ! ' she said,
answering a thought that was not ; and she blushed
with the innocent consciousness of a child. Hastily
she did up the massive and shining coils, hastily donned
a wrapper, and with the rushlight in her hand, stole
into the hall. Below stairs she heard the clock ticking
the deliberate seconds, and Frank jingling with the
decanters in the dining-room. Aversion rose in her,
bitter and momentary. ' Nesty, tippling puggy ! '
she thought ; and the next moment she had knocked
guardedly at Archie's door and was bidden enter.

War of Hermiston



935



FREDERICK YORK POWELL

i 850- 1 904

538 zAljred

TO the statesman and warrior that saved his own
country in her hour of need, preserved her national
individuality, and paved the way to her future unity ;
to the scholar and man of letters that first made of
our English tongue an avenue to all the knowledge of
the past, a vehicle for the highest expression of human
thought that the world was then capable of ; that
raised his vernacular to the rank of a classic language,
is due, at least, the gratitude of those whom he has
benefited. Alfred's life was not an easy one : ' Hard-
ship and grief not a king but would desire to be free
of if he could, but I know that he cannot.' He bade
a man do his duty and look to no reward but God,
but the good report of his fellows was dear to him
as it was to the greatest of his time. A northern
contemporary, one of his foemen, possibly, has put
this strong Teutonic feeling in a simple and direct way :

Cattle die, kinsfolk die,

Land and lea are wasted,
One tiling that never dies I know —

Men's judgement on the dead.

Cattle die, kinsfolk die,

And man himself dies,
But never dies good report

Away from him that won it

And Alfred himself has recorded in well-known
words his heart's desire : ' This I can now most truly
say, that I have desired to live worthily while I lived,
and after my life to leave to the men that should be
after me a remembrance in good works.'

Life, Letters, and Writings

93<5



FREDERICK YORK POWELL



539 Omar IQiayyam

AND for Omar the Persian there were many
jLX. gratifications, and among them those that thrill,
and rightly, the bodily senses. He was no despiser
of the common joys of mankind, he acknowledged
their blessedness. For him, as for Blake, Earth was
a beautiful place ; like brother Martin, he loved wine
and song and woman. The perpetual miracle of the
spring did not appeal to him in vain. The odour of
roses came to him as a very breath from heaven. But
his paradise was not as simple as Muhammad's.

Toward his fellows he was largely tolerant. He
abhorred hypocrisy, but he was not too stern with the
hypocrite ; he loathed bigotry, but yet he did not
deeply condemn the bigot who yearned to murder
him. He revolted openly at the cruelties and tragedies
of life, but he did not wholly accuse the Universe
that baffled him. A man could never be prevented
from doing his duty. He would not allow the Un-
knowable to confound him, and his humour does not
quail before any imaginable thing or being.

There is a frank courage about him ; he dealt
with life as with his mathematics. He was no qutetist.
We cannot steer our drifting raft, nor stem the resist-
less current ; but we have it in our power to behave
decently, to share the meagre stock of victuals fairly
as long as they last, to take the good and evil as it
comes, and even to hope, if we choose to do so, for
a fair haven.

Omar has no heaven to offer, no hell to threaten
with. His appeal is not to spiritualities, his deity is
more faineant than even the gods of Epicurus. To
Omar the fair mirage is but a bright reflection, and

937



FREDERICK YORK POWELL



he will not mistake it for the city that is very far off.
He is a plain, downright man, and his ' message ' is
only a friendly whisper to them that care to sit near
him, bidding them trust to the real and front life
squarely.

Life, Letters, and WrtUngs

ROBERT BONTINE CUNNINGHAME
GRAHAM

1852-

540 On the ' Santa 'Barbara '

EVEN to Cartagena there came echoes of the war.
An old, condemned stern-wheeler, lofty of side,
beam-engined, crank as a coracle, and quite unsea-
worthy, had lain for three years in the mud at Mara-
caibo. Her seams all gaped, her paint was cracked and
blistered by the sun, her engines rusty, and round her
garboard strakes festoons of seaweed had gathered into
a veritable forest, clinging to the barnacles. What
her name had been when she toiled up against the
muddy waters of the Mississippi I cannot tell. The
company that bought her named her the Santa
Barbara. They set her to run from Cartagena to
Quibdo, the capital of the Choc6, up the Atrato
River, and down the coast, touching at Tolu, Cispata,
and other little ports, after a summary repair. . .

Her crew were negroes and nondescripts, and her
engineer, of course, a Scotsman, known as Scottie,
stricken in drink and years ; but capable and brave to
rashness, as he had proved a hundred times by ventur-
ing his life in such a Babylonia as was the rechristened
Santa Barbara. That nothing should be wanting, and
938



R. B. CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM



that the link should be supplied between this antique
vessel worthy to have convoyed La Pinta and La
Santa Maria in their memorable voyage from Palos,
had they not outsailed her, a young German mate,
from one of the Boche steamers, interned in the bay,
acted as captain. He proved himself a sailor and a
man. The Santa Barbara, after the usual delay of
several hours, cleared out of Cartagena in a calm
afternoon. She passed into the Cafio, at whose
mouth the village of Pasacaballos is situated ; then
out into the great lagoon beyond it. There, she met
the gale that seems to have been blowing since the
days of the Conquistadores, and is most likely blowing
as I write. She rolled like a galleon, the heavy upper
decks catching the wind like sails. Seas came aboard
of her and set the packages and bales upon her decks
awash. The miserable passengers were soaked, and
as the evening advanced the seas grew heavier, and
still the Point of Tigua loomed a league or two in
front of her as she lay labouring in the sea.

The German captain dived into the engine-room and
then emerged without his cap, his hair tossed in the
wind, and scanned the horizon anxiously. After a look
about the deck, . . he took his resolution. Advancing
to an Englishman who was sheltering behind a deck-
house, he drew his feet together, clicked his heels,
and said, ' My name is Einstein, Second-Lieutenant
of the Reserve of German Navy,' and raised his
fingers mechanically, forgetting he had lost his cap.
' We are at war,' he said ; 'but what of that ? — no one
cares to die without a fight. You see that headland?
It is the Point of Tigua. The sea is breaking heavily
upon it, and if we drift there we are lost. Only a
month ago a steamer failed to weather it, and not a

939



R. B. CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM



soul was saved. Those that were not dashed on
the rocks, the sharks soon tore to pieces. Upon the
other side of it we shall be in shelter ; but the swine
firemen are frightened and refuse to work. Come
down with me, and . . . ah, that is right, you have
a pistol : we will help Scottie to persuade them to
work on.'

The Englishman, muttering 'All right,' went down
below into the engine-room. The firemen, huddled
in a heap, had turned that ashy-grey colour that
comes into a negro's face at the approach of death, or
strongly moved by fear. A foot or two from the
ship's furnaces the water lapped up dangerously.
Holding their pistols in their hands, the enemies,
made comrades by the deadly peril they were in,
distributed a hearty kick or two and forced the
negroes to fire up.

When they had passed the Point of Tigua, and
the old Santa Barbara had got under shelter, shaking
the water off her decks, as a Newfoundland dog shakes
himself on emerging from a swim, they left the
engine-room and came up on deck. The two men
looked at one another and said nothing, and then
instinctively their hands stole out towards each other.
The Englishman, half shyly, muttered, ' You are
a damned good Boche. My name is Brown.'

Cartagena and the Banks of the Sinic



940



ARTHUR SHADWELL

AND c - 1821

ROBERT HENRY LYTTELTON

1854-

54 1 Oxford v. Cambridge

i

Septem Contra Camum : 1843

THE Rev. Arthur Shadwell, who steered the seven-
oared crew, has kindly furnished me with the
following particulars concerning the race and the
circumstances attending on it :

' When the deciding heat for the Grand Challenge
Cup was about to come off, Mr. Fletcher Menzies,
captain and stroke oar of the Oxford University crew,
fainted while stepping into his boat. A deputation
from that crew immediately proceeded across the
river to inform the holders of the cup, the Cambridge
Subscription Rooms crew, of this accident . they
found them taking their places to row down to the
course. They asked if an eighth man might be allowed
them to fill the captain's place. No one was specially
proposed to be his substitute, but the rules of the
regatta, which had been drawn up in accordance with
a remonstrance made by Oxford in the preceding
year, did not allow any one to be substituted for a man
who had already rowed in a heat : it must be the same
crew in its entirety throughout the races. The
Cambridge Rooms, indeed, were not willing to grant
the petition, but neither was it in their power to grant
it. The Oxford men then asked for a delay to enable
them to make arrangements : some of the opposite
crew were unwilling at first to grant this, but their
objections were overruled, and it was finally arranged
that the competitors should meet in an hour's time.

941



ARTHUR SHADWELL



Oxford then shifted their No. 7 to 8, and their bow
man to No. 7, and taking up their station close under
the lee of the Oxfordshire bank, to be out of the wind,
then blowing fresh, were enabled to hold with their
opponents from the very first, and then gradually
drawing ahead crossed over with a clear lead to the
Berkshire bank, and won by two lengths between the
two boats. Such is the account of this the most
remarkable race on record. The truth was that the
winning crew was not only composed of the heaviest
and finest material ever brought together in an eight-
oar, but they had been gradually forming with in-
cessant care from the October term preceding, and
had been handled in their practice as though they were
preparing for a race on the London long course. No
less pains had been bestowed upon their boat itself,
which was truly worthy to carry them. Its subsequent
history is remarkable. A few days after the Henley
match it defeated the Leander club : in the next
summer it beat both Cambridge University and the
Leander ; and after lasting for years as a kind of sacred
model, it was dismembered to form souvenirs of every
kind, oars, rudders, and snuff-boxes ; till at last the
portion containing the coxswain's thwart was converted
into a presidential chair of state for the University
Boat Club barge twenty-five years after its launch.'

The Oxford and Cambridge Boat Races from 1829 to lS6g
ii

Colderis Over : 1870

HE had not now to receive the ball, for Mr. Hill,
who was bustling the field a good deal, stood at
his place ready to play, and amidst dead silence the
ball was tossed to Mr. Cobden.
942



ROBERT HENRY LYTTELTON



We say with confidence that never can one over
bowled by any bowler at any future time surpass the
over that Cobden was about to deliver then, and it
deserves a minute description. Cobden took a long
run and bowled very fast, and on the whole was for
his pace a straight bowler. But he bowled with little
or no break, had not got a puzzling delivery, and
though effective against inferior bats, would never
have succeeded in bowling out a man like Mr. Ottaway
if he had sent a thousand balls to him. However, on
the present occasion Ottaway was out, those he had to
bowl to were not first-rate batsmen, and Cobden
could bowl a good yorker.

You might almost have heard a pin drop as Cobden
began his run and the ball whizzed from his hand.
Crack ! was heard as Mr. Hill's bat met the ball
plump and hard, and a yell that beat Donnybrook
burst from several thousand Oxford throats. The
Oxford eleven still sat at the threshold of the pavilion
ready to welcome their comrades after the winning
hit was made, and they yelled louder than the rest.
The ball was hit hard and low in the direction of
long-off, where stood Mr. Bourne, a safe fieldsman ;
but that he could save this ball from going to the
ropes and winning the match by three wickets nobody
dreamt. However, the yell of Oxford subdued to
a gentler tone, and it was seen that Mr. Bourne had
got his left hand in the way and converted a fourer
into a single ; as the match stood, Oxford wanted
2 to tie and 3 to win and three wickets to go down :
Mr. Butler to receive the ball. The second ball that
Cobden bowled was very similar to the first, straight
and well up on the off stump. Mr. Butler did what
anybody else except Louis Hall or Shrewsbury would

943



ROBERT HENRY LYTTELTON



have done, namely, let drive vigorously. Unfortunately
he did not keep the ball down, and it went straight and
hard a catch to Mr. Bourne, to whom everlasting
credit is due, for he held it, and away went Mr. Butler
— amidst Cambridge shouts this time. The position
was getting serious, for neither Mr. Stewart nor
Mr. Belcher was renowned as a batsman. Rather pale,
but with a jaunty air that cricketers are well aware
frequently conceals a sickly feeling of nervousness,
Mr. Belcher walked to the wicket and took his guard.
He felt that if only he could stop one ball and be
bowled out the next, still Mr. Hill would get another
chance of a knock and the match would probably be
won. Cobden had bowled two balls, and two more
wickets had to be got ; if therefore a wicket was got
each ball the match would be won by Cambridge,
and Mr. Hill would have no further opportunity of
distinguishing himself. In a dead silence Cobden
again took the ball. Everybody knows that the sight
of a yorker raises hope in a batsman's breast that either
a full pitch or a half-volley is coming. To play either
of these balls ninety-nine players out of a hundred
raise their bat off the ground as a first preliminary.
If you are not a quick player the raising of the bat
sometimes means nothing less than opening the door
of defence, and the ball getting underneath. This is
precisely what happened on the present occasion, and
Cobden shot in a very fast yorker. A vision of the
winning hit flashed across Mr. Belcher's brain, and he
raised his bat preparatory to performing great things.
He had not seen till too late that neither a full pitch
nor a half -volley had been bowled ; he could not get
his bat down again in time, the ball went under, and
his wicket was shattered. There was still one more ball

944



ROBERT HENRY LYTTELTON



wanted to complete, and Mr. Belcher, a sad man,
walked away amid an uproarious storm of cheers.

Matters were becoming distinctly grave, and very
irritating must it have been to Mr. Hill, who was like
a billiard-player watching his rival in the middle of
a big break ; he could say a good deal and think a lot,
but he could do nothing. Mr. Stewart, spes ultima of
Oxford, with feelings that are utterly impossible to
describe, padded and gloved, nervously took off his
coat in the pavilion. If ever a man deserved pity,
Mr. Stewart deserved it on that occasion. He did not
profess to be a good bat, and his friends did not claim
so much for him ; he was an excellent wicket-keeper,
but he had to go in at a crisis that the best bat in
England would not like to face. Mr. Pauncefote, the
Oxford captain, was seen addressing a few words of
earnest exhortation to him, and with a rather sick
feeling Mr. Stewart went to the wicket. Mr. Hill
looked at him cheerfully, but very earnestly did
Mr. Stewart wish the next ball well over. He took
his guard and held his hands low on the bat handle,
which was fixed fast as a tree on the block-hole ; for
Mr. Pauncefote, having seen that Mr. Belcher lost his
wicket by raising his bat and letting the ball get under
it, had earnestly entreated Mr. Stewart to put the
bat straight in the block-hole and keep it there without
moving it. This was not by any means bad advice,
for the bat covers a great deal of the wicket, and
though it is a piece of counsel not likely to be offered
to W. G. Grace or Daft, it might not have been
inexpedient to offer it to Mr. Stewart. Here, then,
was the situation — Mr. Stewart standing manfully
up to the wicket, Mr. Cobden beginning his run, and
a perfectly dead silence in the crowd. Whiz went the

94S



ROBERT HENRY LYTTELTON



ball, Stewart received the same on his right thigh,
fly went the bails, the batsman was bowled off his
legs, and Cambridge had won the match by z runs !
The situation was bewildering. Nobody could quite
realize what had happened for a second or so, but then
— up went Mr. Absalom's hat, down the pavilion
steps with miraculous rapidity flew the Rev. A. R.
Ward, and smash went Mr. Charles Marsham's
umbrella against the pavilion brickwork.

The Badminton Library • Cricket

ARTHUR BINGHAM WALKLEY

. l8s5 ~
542 The Rational Qallery

WHO was it who said that, whenever a new book
came out, he went and read an old one? It
sounds like Lamb or Hazlitt and, I believe, is generally
attributed to one or other of the pair, but I have never
succeeded in tracing it. Whenever, with each recur-
rent May, the ' Academy ' reopens, I resolve to visit
it, so as to be abreast of the times, to have a presentable
opinion about ' the picture of the year ', and to
deplore with actual instances the present condition of
British art, but it always ends in my going to the
National Gallery instead.

The truth is, brand-new pictures intimidate me.
They are aggressive and garish, like the ' new rich ' ;
uncomfortable, like new boots ; indigestible, like new
vintage port ; disconcerting, like the new Regent
Street. They challenge a precipitate judgement. It
seems absurd to regard things with the paint hardly
dry on them sub specie aeternttatis. ' Sir, it is driving
on the system of life,' and so, I suppose, they must
946



ARTHUR BINGHAM WALKLEY



continue to be painted. But I cannot abide them.
' The old masters were very fine,' said Mr. Ramsay
MacDonald the other day, ' but we could not live on
the old masters alone.' Well, the old masters suffice
me. They do not impertinently compete with nature,
they have become part of it. Mousehold Heath may
be elsewhere on the map, but for me it is situate on
the N. side of Trafalgar Square. Endymion Porter
may have a history of his own, but for me he is just
two portraits, remarkably dissimilar, and an unfor-
gettable name of romance. The Wertheimer family
of Mr. Sargent have become as ' legendary ', belong
as much to the world of imagination as Hogarth's
' Family Group ', who it seems were in real life named
Strode and had a butler named Jonathan Powell — but
have now all changed their names to Hogarth. When
the earliest of Mr. Sargent's Wertheimers appeared it
created, I believe, what people call a ' sensation '.
It was a new picture and the vulgar had their oppor-
tunity of gloating over novelty. Now it is an old
master, and we can placidly enjoy it, as we placidly
enjoy Holbein's Duchess of Milan or Constable's
Malvern Hall. I mention these two last, because they
are things, unlike the Wertheimer, of pure beauty.
' The Sicilian expedition,' wrote Gray to his friend
West, who was reading Thucydides, ' is it or is it not
the very finest thing you ever read in your life? ' So
I would ask of Constable's ' Malvern Hall ', is it or is it
not the very finest bit of English Landscape you ever
saw in your life?

I shall very likely be called a Philistine for my pains
— be told that I like English park scenery and enjoy
the Constable because it depicts that : in other words,
that I appreciate not the art but the subject, which

947



ARTHUR BINGHAM WALKLEY



is an aesthetic heresy, &c, &c. I do not plead guilty.
The colouring of the picture, the dark blue-greens of
the trees against the pale red of the Georgian house ;
the elegant symmetry of the design, with the reflection
of the house in the lake ; above all, what I must
inadequately call the feeling of the whole composition
— all these things affect me. That the subject is
a beautiful one in itself ' spoils nothing as the French
say. But what a wonderful corner that is where this
gem modestly glows ! The ' Flatford Mill ' is close
by it, and the ' Frosty Morning ' on the next wall.
These are pictures that make one glad to be an English-
man, with an affectionate heart for the English country-
side. It is a perpetual miracle to me that one can
mount a few steps out of Trafalgar Square into a quiet
room there, and, all of a sudden, enjoy these things,
be transported and transformed by them, be changed
by them into a different being. We become, for the
time, Constables and Turners ourselves, see with their
eyes, feel with their emotions.

Sltll More Prejudice

OSCAR WILDE

1856-1900

543 The Qritic as ^Artist

THE world is made by the singer for the dreamer. . .
On the mouldering citadel of Troy lies the lizard
like a thing of green bronze. The owl has built her
nest in the palace of Priam. Over the empty plain
wander shepherd and goatherd with their flocks, and
where, on the wine-surfaced, oily sea, dlvo\\r iroVros,
as Homer calls it, copper-prowed and streaked with
vermilion, the great galleys of the Danaoi came in
948



OSCAR WILDE

their gleaming crescent, the lonely tunny-fisher sits
in his little boat and watches the bobbing corks of
his net. Yet, every morning the doors of the city are
thrown open, and on foot, or in horse-drawn chariot,
the warriors go forth to battle, and mock their enemies
from behind their iron masks. All day long the fight
rages, and when night comes the torches gleam by
the tents, and the cresset burns in the hall. Those
who live in marble or on painted panel, know of life
but a single exquisite instant, eternal indeed in its
beauty, but limited to one note of passion or one mood
of calm. Those whom the poet makes live have their
myriad emotions of joy and terror, of courage and
despair, of pleasure and of suffering. The seasons
come and go in glad or saddening pageant, and with
winged or leaden feet the years pass by before them.
They have their youth and their manhood, they are
children, and they grow old. It is always dawn for
St. Helena, as Veronese saw her at the window.
Through the still morning air the angels bring her
the symbol of God's pain. The cool breezes of the
morning lift the gilt threads from her brow. On that
little hill by the city of Florence, where the lovers of
Giorgione are lying, it is always the solstice of noon,
of noon made so languorous by summer suns that
hardly can the slim naked girl dip into the marble
tank the round bubble of clear glass, and the long
fingers of the lute-player rest idly upon the chords.
It is twilight always for the dancing nymphs whom
Corot set free among the silver poplars of France.
In eternal twilight they move, those frail diaphanous
figures, whose tremulous white feet seem not to touch
the dew-drenched grass they tread on. But those
who walk in epos, drama, or romance, see through the

949



OSCAR WILDE



labouring months the young moons wax and wane,
and watch the night from evening unto morning
star, and from sunrise unto sunsetting, can note the
shifting day with all its gold and shadow. For them,
as for us, the flowers bloom and wither, and the Earth,
that Green-tressed Goddess as Coleridge calls her,
alters her raiment for their pleasure. The statue is
concentrated to one moment of perfection. The
image stained upon the canvas possesses no spiritual
element of growth or change. If they know nothing
of death, it is because they know little of life, for the
secrets of life and death belong to those, and those
only, whom the sequence of time affects, and who
possess not merely the present but the future, and can
rise or fall from a past of glory or of shame. Move-
ment, that problem of the visible arts, can be truly
realized by Literature alone. It is Literature that
shows us the body in its swiftness and the soul in its
unrest.

Intentions

GEORGE BERNARD SHAW

1856-

544 The <tArtist- c Philosopher

THAT the author of Everyman was no mere artist,
but an artist-philosopher, and that the artist-
philosophers are the only sort of artists I take quite
seriously, will be no news to you. Even Plato and
Boswell, as the dramatists who invented Socrates and
Dr. Johnson, impress me more deeply than the
romantic playwrights. Ever since, as a boy, I first
breathed the air of the transcendental regions at
a performance of Mozart's Zauberflote, I have been
95°



GEORGE BERNARD SHAW



proof against the garish splendors and alcoholic
excitements of the ordinary stage combinations of
Tappertitian romance with the police intelligence.
Bunyan, Blake, Hogarth and Turner (these four
apart and above all the English classics), Goethe,
Shelley, Schopenhauer, Wagner, Ibsen, Morris, Tol-
stoy and Nietzsche are among the writers whose
peculiar sense of the world I recognize as more or
less akin to my own. Mark the word peculiar. I read
Dickens and Shakespear without shame or stint ; but
their pregnant observations and demonstrations of life
are not co-ordinated into any philosophy or religion :
on the contrary, Dickens's sentimental assumptions
are violently contradicted by his observations ; and
Shakespear's pessimism is only his wounded humanity.
Both have the specific genius of the fictionist and the
common sympathies of human feeling and thought
in pre-eminent degree. They are often saner and
shrewder than the philosophers just as Sancho Panza
was often saner and shrewder than Don Quixote.
They clear away vast masses of oppressive gravity by
their sense of the ridiculous, which is at bottom
a combination of sound moral judgment with light-
hearted good humor. But they are concerned with
the diversities of the world instead of with its unities. . .

Now you cannot say this of the works of the artist-
philosophers. You cannot say it, for instance, of The
Pilgrim's Progress. Put your Shakespearian hero and
coward, Henry V and Pistol or Parolles, beside
Mr. Valiant and Mr. Fearing, and you have a sudden
revelation of the abyss that lies between the fashion-
able author who could see nothing in the world but
personal aims and the tragedy of their disappointment
or the comedy of their incongruity, and the field

95i



GEORGE BERNARD SHAW



preacher who achieved virtue and courage by identi-
fying himself with the purpose of the world as he
understood it. The contrast is enormous : Bunyan's
coward stirs your blood more than Shakespear's hero,
who actually leaves you cold and secretly hostile. You
suddenly see that Shakespear, with all his flashes
and divinations, never understood virtue and courage,
never conceived how any man who was not a fool
could, like Bunyan's hero, look back from the brink
of the river of death over the strife and labour of his
pilgrimage, and say ' yet do I not repent me ' ; or,
with the panache of a millionaire, bequeath ' my
sword to him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage,
and my courage and skill to him that can get it.' This
is the true joy in life, the being used for a purpose
recognized by yourself as a mighty one ; the being
thoroughly worn out before you are thrown on the
scrap heap ; the being a force of Nature instead of
a feverish selfish little clod of ailments and grievances
complaining that the world will not devote itself to
making you happy. And also the only real tragedy
in life is the being used by personally minded men
for purposes which you recognize to be base. All the
rest is at worst mere misfortune or mortality : this
alone is misery, slavery, hell on earth ; and the revolt
against it is the only force that offers a man's work to
the poor artist, whom our personally minded rich
people would so willingly employ as pandar, buffoon,
beauty monger, sentimentalizer and the like.

Man and Superman. Epistle Dedicatory to
Arthur Bingham Walkley



95*



GEORGE GISSIN.G

18 57-1903

545 Shakespeare's Island

TO-DAY I have read The Tempest. . . Among
the many reasons which make me glad to have
been born in England, one of the first is that I read
Shakespeare in my mother tongue. If I try to imagine
myself as one who cannot know him face to face, who
hears him only speaking from afar, and that in accents
which only through the labouring intelligence can
touch the living soul, there comes upon me a sense of
chill discouragement, of dreary deprivation. I am
wont to think that I can read Homer, and, assuredly,
if any man enjoys him, it is I ; but can I for a moment
dream that Homer yields me all his music, that his
word is to me as to him who walked by the Hellenic
shore when Hellas lived ? I know that there reaches
me across the vast of time no more than a faint and
broken echo ; I know that it would be fainter still,
but for its blending with those memories of youth
which are as a glimmer of the world's primeval glory.
Let every land have joy of its poet ; for the poet is
the land itself, all its greatness and its sweetness, all
that incommunicable heritage for which men live and
die. As I close the book, love and reverence possess
me. Whether does my full heart turn to the great
Enchanter, or to the Island upon which he has laid
his spell ? I know not. I cannot think of them apart.
In the love and reverence awakened by that voice of
voices, Shakespeare and England are but one.

Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft



953



JOSEPH CONRAD

1857-1924

546 zA Qlose Shave

HOW he first got in touch with his captain's wife
Powell relates in this way. It was long before
his memorable conversation with the mate and shortly
after getting clear of the channel. It was gloomy
weather ; dead head wind, blowing quite half a gale ;
the Ferndale under reduced sail was stretching close-
hauled across the track of the homeward-bound ships,
just moving through the water and no more, since
there was no object in pressing her and the weather
looked threatening. About ten o'clock at night he
was alone on the poop, in charge, keeping well aft
by the weather rail and staring to windward, when
amongst the white, breaking seas, under the black sky,
he made out the lights of a ship. He watched them for
some time. She was running dead before the wind
of course. She will pass jolly close — he said to himself ;
and then suddenly he felt a great mistrust of that
approaching ship. She 's heading straight for us — he
thought. It was not his business to get out of the way.
On the contrary. And his uneasiness grew by the
recollection of the forty tons of dynamite in the body
of the Ferndale ; not the sort of cargo one thinks of
with equanimity in connection with a threatened
collision. He gazed at the two small lights in the dark
immensity filled with the angry noise of the seas. They
fascinated him till their plainness to his sight gave him
a conviction that there was danger there. He knew
in his mind what to do in the emergency, but very
properly he felt that he must call the captain at once.
He crossed the deck in one bound. By the im-
954



JOSEPH CONRAD

memorial custom and usage of the sea the captain's
room is on the starboard side. You would just as soon
expect your captain to have his nose at the back of
his head as to have his stateroom on the port side of
the ship. Powell forgot all about the direction on
that point given him by the chief. He flew over as
I said, stamped with his foot and then putting his
face to the cowl of the big ventilator shouted down
there : ' Please come on deck, sir,' in a voice which
was not trembling or scared but which we may call
fairly expressive. There could not be a mistake as
to the urgence of the call. But instead of the expected
alert ' All right ! ' and the sound of a rush down
there, he heard only a faint exclamation — then silence.

Think of his astonishment ! He remained there,
his ear in the cowl of the ventilator, his eyes fastened
on those menacing sidelights dancing on the gusts of
wind which swept the angry darkness of the sea. It
was as though he had waited an hour but it was some-
thing much less than a minute before he fairly bellowed
into the wide tube ' Captain Anthony ! ' An agitated
' What is it ? ' was what he heard down there in
Mrs. Anthony's voice, light rapid footsteps. . . Why
didn't she try to wake him up ! 'I want the captain,'
he shouted, then gave it up, making a dash at the
companion where a blue light was kept, resolved to
act for himself.

On the way he glanced at the helmsman whose face
lighted up by the binnacle lamps was calm. He said
rapidly to him : ' Stand by to spin that helm up at the
first word.' The answer ' Aye, aye, sir,' was delivered
in a steady voice. Then Mr. Powell, after a shout for
the watch on deck to ' lay aft,' ran to the ship's side
and struck the blue light on the rail.

955



JOSEPH CONRAD

A sort of nasty little spitting of sparks was all that
came. The light (perhaps affected by damp) had
failed to ignite. The time of all these various acts
must be counted in seconds. Powell confessed to me
that at this failure he experienced a paralysis of thought,
of voice, of limbs. The unexpectedness of this misfire
positively overcame his faculties. It was the only thing
for which his imagination was not prepared. It was
knocked clean over. When it got up it was with the
suggestion that he must do something at once or there
would be a broadside smash accompanied by the
explosion of dynamite, in which both ships would be
blown up and every soul on board of them would
vanish off the earth in an enormous flame and uproar.

He saw the catastrophe happening and at the same
moment, before he could open his mouth or stir a
limb to ward off the vision, a voice very near his ear,
the measured voice of Captain Anthony, said :
' Wouldn't light — eh ? Throw it down ! Jump for
the flare-up.'

The spring of activity in Mr. Powell was released
with great force. He jumped. The flare-up was kept
inside the companion with a box of matches ready to
hand. Almost before he knew he had moved he was
diving under the companion slide. He got hold of
the can in the dark and tried to strike a light. But he
had to press the flare-holder to his breast with one
arm, his fingers were damp and stiff, his hands trembled
a little. One match broke. Another went out. In
its flame he saw the colourless face of Mrs. Anthony
a little below him, standing on the cabin stairs. Her
eyes which were very close to his (he was in a crouching
posture on the top step) seemed to burn darkly in
the vanishing light. On deck the captain's voice was
956



JOSEPH CONRAD



heard sudden and unexpectedly sardonic : ' You had
better look sharp, if you want to be in time.'

' Let me have the box,' said Mrs. Anthony in a
hurried and familiar whisper which sounded amused
as if they had been a couple of children up to some lark
behind a wall. He was glad of the offer which seemed
to him very natural, and without ceremony —

' Here you are. Catch hold.'

Their hands touched in the dark and she took the
box while he held the paraffin-soaked torch in its iron
holder. He thought of warning her : ' Look out for
yourself.' But before he had the time to finish the
sentence the flare blazed up violently between them
and he saw her throw herself back with an arm across
her face. ' Hallo,' he exclaimed ; only he could not
stop a moment to ask if she was hurt. He bolted out
of the companion straight into his captain who took
the flare from him and held it high above his head.

The fierce flame fluttered like a silk flag, throwing
an angry swaying glare mingled with moving shadows
over the poop, lighting up the concave surfaces of the
sails, gleaming on the wet paint of the white rails.
And young Powell turned his eyes to windward with
a catch in his breath.

The strange ship, a darker shape in the night, did
not seem to be moving onwards but only to grow
more distinct right abeam, staring at the Ferndale
with one green and one red eye which swayed and
tossed as if they belonged to the restless head of some
invisible monster ambushed in the night amongst
the waves. A moment, long like eternity, elapsed,
and, suddenly, the monster which seemed to take
to itself the shape of a mountain shut its green eye
without as much as a preparatory wink.

957



JOSEPH CONRAD



Mr. Powell drew a free breath. ' All right now,'
said Captain Anthony in a quiet undertone. He gave
the blazing flare to Powell and walked aft to watch
the passing of that menace of destruction coming
blindly with its parti-coloured stare out of a blind
night on the wings of a sweeping wind. Her very
form could be distinguished now black and elongated
amongst the hissing patches of foam bursting along
her path.

As is always the case with a ship running before wind
and sea she did not seem to an onlooker to move very
fast ; but to be progressing indolently in long leisurely
bounds and pauses in the midst of the overtaking
waves. It was only when actually passing the stern
within easy hail of the Ferndale that her headlong
speed became apparent to the eye. With the red light
shut off and soaring like an immense shadow on the
crest of a wave she was lost to view in one great,
forward swing, melting into the lightless space.

' Close shave,' said Captain Anthony in an indifferent
voice just raised enough to be heard in the wind.
' A blind lot on board that ship. Put out the flare
now.'



UST about sunset, which is the time of burials at



J sea, the Amelia was hove to and, the rope being
manned, the tartane was brought alongside and her
two keepers ordered on board their ship. Captain
Vincent, leaning over with his elbows on the rail,
seemed lost in thought. At last the first lieutenant
spoke.



Chance



547



The Tartane




958



JOSEPH CONRAD

' What are we going to do with that tartane, sir ?
Our men are on board.'

'We are going to sink her by gunfire,' declared
Captain Vincent suddenly. ' His ship makes a very
good coffin for a seaman, and those men deserve better
than to be thrown overboard to roll on the waves.
Let them rest quietly at the bottom of the sea in the
craft to which they had stuck so well.'

The lieutenant, making no reply, waited for some
more positive order. Every eye in the ship was turned
on the captain. But Captain Vincent said nothing
and seemed unable or unwilling to give it yet. He was
feeling vaguely that in all his good intentions there
was something wanting.

' Ah ! Mr. Bolt,' he said, catching sight of the
master's mate in the waist. ' Did they have a flag
on board that craft ? '

' I think she had a tiny bit of ensign when the chase
began, sir, but it must have blown away. It is not at
the end of her mainyard now.' He looked over the
side. ' The halliards are rove, though,' he added.

' We must have a French ensign somewhere on
board,' said Captain Vincent.

' Certainly, sir,' struck in the master, who was
listening.

' Well, Mr. Bolt,' said Captain Vincent, ' you have
had most to do with all this. Take a few men with
you, bend the French ensign on the halliards and sway
his mainyard to the masthead.' He smiled at all the
faces turned towards him. ' After all, they never
surrendered and, by heavens, gentlemen, we will let
them go down with their colours flying.'

The Rover



959



JOSEPH CONRAD



YOUTH
548 i. The Leak

A ND we pumped. And there was no break in the
jTjl weather. The sea was white like a sheet of foam,
like a caldron of boiling milk ; there was not a break
in the clouds, no — not the size of a man's hand —
no, not for so much as ten seconds. There was for
us no sky, there were for us no stars, no sun, no universe
— nothing but angry clouds and an infuriated sea. We
pumped watch and watch, for dear life ; and it seemed
to last for months, for years, for all eternity, as though
we had been dead and gone to a hell for sailors. We
forgot the day of the week, the name of the month,
what year it was, and whether we had ever been
ashore. The sails blew away, she lay broadside on
under a weather-cloth, the ocean poured over her,
and we did not care. We turned those handles, and
had the eyes of idiots. As soon as we had crawled on
deck I used to take a round turn with a rope about the
men, the pumps, and the mainmast, and we turned,
we turned incessantly, with the water to our waists,
to our necks, over our heads. It was all one. We had
forgotten how it felt to be dry.

And there was somewhere in me the thought :
By Jove ! this is the deuce of an adventure — some-
thing you read about ; and it is my first voyage as
second mate — and I am only twenty — and here I am
lasting it out as well as any of these men, and keeping
my chaps up to the mark. I was pleased. I would
not have given up the experience for worlds. I had
moments of exultation. Whenever the old dismantled
craft pitched heavily with her counter high in the air,
960



JOSEPH CONRAD

she seemed to me to throw up, like an appeal, like a
defiance, like a cry to the clouds without mercy, the
words written on her stern : ' Judea, London. Do
or Die.'

O youth ! The strength of it, the faith of it, the
imagination of it ! To me she was not an old rattle-
trap carting about the world a lot of coal for a freight
— to me she was the endeavour, the test, the trial of
life. I think of her with pleasure, with affection, with
regret — as you would think of some one dead you have
loved. I shall never forget her. . . Pass the bottle.

ii. Ship on Fire

I WALKED up to the skipper and shook him by the
shoulder. At last he opened his eyes, but did not
move. ' Time to leave her, sir,' I said, quietly.

He got up painfully, looked at the flames, at the
sea sparkling round the ship, and black, black as ink
farther away ; he looked at the stars shining dim
through a thin veil of smoke in a sky black, black as
Erebus.

' Youngest first,' he said.

And the ordinary seaman, wiping his mouth with
the back of his hand, got up, clambered over the
taffrail, and vanished. Others followed. One, on the
point of going over, stopped short to drain his bottle,
and with a great swing of his arm flung it at the fire.
' Take this ! ' he cried.

The skipper lingered disconsolately, and we left
him to commune alone for a while with his first com-
mand. Then I went up again and brought him away
at last. It was time. The ironwork on the poop was
hot to the touch.

2830 1 1 961



JOSEPH CONRAD

Then the painter of the long-boat was cut, and
the three boats, tied together, drifted clear of the
ship. It was just sixteen hours after the explosion
when we abandoned her. Mahon had charge of the
second boat, and I had the smallest — the 14-foot thing.
The long-boat would have taken the lot of us ; but the
skipper said we must save as much property as we could
— for the underwriters — and so I got my first command.
I had two men with me, a bag of biscuits, a few tins
of meat, and a breaker of water. I was ordered to keep
close to the long-boat, that in case of bad weather we
might be taken into her.

And do you know what I thought f I thought I
would part company as soon as I could. I wanted to
have my first command all to myself. I wasn't going
to sail in a squadron if there was a chance for inde-
pendent cruising. I would make land by myself. I
would beat the other boats. Youth ! All youth ! The
silly, charming, beautiful youth.

But we did not make a start at once. We must see
the last of the ship. And so the boats drifted about
that night, heaving and setting on the swell. The men
dozed, waked, sighed, groaned. I looked at the burning
ship.

Between the darkness of earth and heaven she was
burning fiercely upon a disc of purple sea shot by the
blood-red play of gleams ; upon a disc of water, glitter-
ing and sinister. A high, clear flame, an immense and
lonely flame, ascended from the ocean, and from its
summit the black smoke poured continuously at the
sky. She burned furiously ; mournful and imposing
like a funeral pile kindled in the night, surrounded by
the sea, watched over by the stars. A magnificent
death had come like a grace, like a gift, like a reward to
962



JOSEPH CONRAD

that old ship at the end of her laborious days. The
surrender of her weary ghost to the keeping of stars and
sea was stirring like the sight of a glorious triumph.
The masts fell just before daybreak, and for a moment
there was a burst and turmoil of sparks that seemed to
fill with flying fire the night patient and watchful, the
vast night lying silent upon the sea. At daylight she
was only a charred shell, floating still under a cloud of
smoke and bearing a glowing mass of coal within.

Then the oars were got out, and the boats forming
in a line moved round her remains as if in procession —
the long-boat leading. As we pulled across her stern
a slim dart of fire shot out viciously at us, and suddenly
she went down, head first, in a great hiss of steam. The
unconsumed stern was the last to sink ; but the paint
had gone, had cracked, had peeled off, and there were
no letters, there was no word, no stubborn device that
was like her soul, to flash at the rising sun her creed
and her name.

We made our way north.

Hi. The Landfall

I NEED not tell you what it is to be knocking about
in an open boat. I remember nights and days of
calm, when we pulled, we pulled, and the boat seemed
to stand still, as if bewitched within the circle of the
sea horizon. I remember the heat, the deluge of rain-
squalls that kept us baling for dear life (but filled our
water-cask), and I remember sixteen hours on end with
a mouth dry as a cinder and a steering-oar over the
stern to keep my first command head on to a breaking
sea. I did not know how good a man I was till then.
I remember the drawn faces, the dejected figures of my

963



JOSEPH CONRAD

two men, and I remember my youth and the feeling
that will never come back any more — the feeling that
I could last for ever, outlast the sea, the earth, and all
men ; the deceitful feeling that lures us on to joys, to
perils, to love, to vain effort — to death ; the trium-
phant conviction of strength, the heat of life in the
handful of dust, the glow in the heart that with every
year grows dim, grows cold, grows small, and expires —
and expires, too soon, too soon — before life itself.

And this is how I see the East. I have seen its secret
places and have looked into its very soul ; but now
I see it always from a small boat, a high outline of
mountains, blue and afar in the morning ; like faint
mist at noon ; a jagged wall of purple at sunset. I
have the feel of the oar in my hand, the vision of
a scorching blue sea in my eyes. And I see a bay, a
wide bay, smooth as glass and polished like ice, shim-
mering in the dark. A red light burns far off upon the
gloom of the land, and the night is soft and warm. We
drag at the oars with aching arms, and suddenly a puff
of wind, a puff faint and tepid and laden with strange
odours of blossoms, of aromatic wood, comes out of
the still night — the first sigh of the East on my face.
That I can never forget. It was impalpable and
enslaving, like a charm, like a whispered promise of
mysterious delight.

We had been pulling this finishing spell for eleven
hours. Two pulled, and he whose turn it was to rest
sat at the tiller. We had made out the red light in
that bay and steered for it, guessing it must mark some
small coasting port. We passed two vessels, outlandish
and high-sterned, sleeping at anchor, and, approaching
the light, now very dim, ran the boat's nose against
the end of a jutting wharf. We were blind with
964



JOSEPH CONRAD

fatigue. My men dropped the oars and fell off the
thwarts as if dead. I made fast to a pile. A current
rippled softly. The scented obscurity of the shore was
grouped into vast masses, a density of colossal clumps
of vegetation, probably — mute and fantastic shapes.
And at their foot the semi-circle of a beach gleamed
faintly, like an illusion. There was not a light, not
a stir, not a sound. The mysterious East faced me,
perfumed like a flower, silent like death, dark like a
grave.

And I sat weary beyond expression, exulting like
a conqueror, sleepless and entranced as if before a pro-
found, a fateful enigma.

A splashing of oars, a measured dip reverberating on
the level of water, intensified by the silence of the shore
into loud claps, made me jump up. A boat, a European
boat, was coming in. I invoked the name of the dead ;
I hailed : Judea ahoy ! A thin shout answered.

It was the captain, I had beaten the flagship by
three hours, and I was glad to hear the old man's voice
again, tremulous and tired. 'Is it you, Marlow? '
' Mind the end of that jetty, sir,' I cried.

iv. The East

I PULLED back, made fast again to the jetty, and
then went to sleep at last. I had faced the silence
of the East. I had heard some of its language. But
when I opened my eyes again the silence was as com-
plete as though it had never been broken. I was lying
in a flood of light, and the sky had never looked so far,
so high, before. I opened my eyes and lay without
moving.

And then I saw the men of the East — they were

96S



JOSEPH CONRAD

looking at me. The whole length of the jetty was full
of people. I saw brown, bronze, yellow faces, the black
eyes, the glitter, the colour of an Eastern crowd. And
all these beings stared without a murmur, without a
sigh, without a movement. They stared down at the
boats, at the sleeping men who at night had come to
them from the sea. Nothing moved. The fronds of
palms stood still against the sky. Not a branch stirred
along the shore, and the brown roofs of hidden houses
peeped through the green foliage, through the big
leaves that hung shining and still like leaves forged of
heavy metal. This was the East of the ancient naviga-
tors, so old, so mysterious, resplendent and sombre,
living and unchanged, full of danger and promise. And
these were the men. I sat up suddenly. A wave of
movement passed through the crowd from end to end,
passed along the heads, swayed the bodies, ran along
the jetty like a ripple on the water, like a breath of
wind on a field — and all was still again. I see it now —
the wide sweep of the bay, the glittering sands, the
wealth of green infinite and varied, the sea blue like
the sea of a dream, the crowd of attentive faces, the
blaze of vivid colour — the water reflecting it all, the
curve of the shore, the jetty, the high-sterned out-
landish craft floating still, and the three boats with the
tired men from the West sleeping, unconscious of the
land and the people and of the violence of sunshine.
They slept thrown across the thwarts, curled on
bottom-boards, in the careless attitudes of death. The
head of the old skipper, leaning back in the stern of the
long-boat, had fallen on his breast, and he looked as
though he would never wake. Farther out old Mahon's
face was upturned to the sky, with the long white
beard spread out on his breast, as though he had been
966



JOSEPH CONRAD

shot where he sat at the tiller ; and a man, all in a heap
in the bows of the boat, slept with both arms embracing
the stem-head and with his cheek laid on the gunwale.
The East looked at them without a sound.

I have known its fascination since ; I have seen the
mysterious shores, the still water, the lands of brown
nations, where a stealthy Nemesis lies in wait, pursues,
overtakes so many of the conquering race, who are
proud of their wisdom, of their knowledge, of their
strength. But for me all the East is contained in that
vision of my youth. It is all in that moment when
I opened my young eyes on it. I came upon it from
a tussle with the sea — and I was young — and I saw it
looking at me. And this is all that is left of it !
Only a moment ; a moment of strength, of romance,
of glamour — of youth ! . . A flick of sunshine upon
a strange shore, the time to remember, the time for
a sigh, and — good-bye ! — Night — Good-bye ! . .

He drank.

Ah ! The good old time — the good old time. Youth
and the sea. Glamour and the sea ! The good, strong
sea, the salt, bitter sea, that could whisper to you and
roar at you and knock your breath out of you.

He drank again.

By all that 's wonderful it is the sea, I believe, the
sea itself — or is it youth alone? Who can tell? But
you here — you all had something out of life : money,
love — whatever one gets on shore — and, tell me, wasn't
that the best time, that time when we were young at
sea ; young and had nothing, on the sea that gives
nothing, except hard knocks — and sometimes a chance
to feel your strength — that only — what you all regret ?

Youth



967



GEORGE MOORE

1857-

549 Esther's Son

AT twelve o'clock Esther and Mrs. Barfield walked
XX. out on the lawn. A loud wind came up from the
sea, and it shook the evergreens as if it were angry with
them. A rook carried a stick to the tops of the tall
trees, and the women drew their cloaks about them.
The train passed across the vista, and the women
wondered how long it would take Jack to walk from
the station. Then another rook stooped to the edge
of the plantation, gathered a twig, and carried it away.
The wind was rough ; it caught the evergreens under-
neath and blew them out like umbrellas ; the grass
had not yet begun to grow, and the grey sea harmonized
with the grey-green land. The women waited on the
windy lawn, their skirts blown against their legs,
keeping their hats on with difficulty. It was too cold
for standing still. They turned and walked a few steps
towards the house, and then looked round.

A tall soldier came through the gate. He wore a
long red cloak, and a small cap jauntily set on the side
of his close-clipped head. Esther uttered a little ex-
clamation, and ran to meet him. He took his mother
in his arms, kissed her, and they walked towards
Mrs. Barfield together. All was forgotten in the
happiness of the moment — the long fight for his life,
and the possibility that any moment might declare him
to be mere food for powder and shot. She was only
conscious that she had accomplished her woman's
work — she had brought him up to man's estate ; and
that was her sufficient reward. What a fine fellow he
was ! She did not know he was so handsome, and
blushing with pleasure and pride she glanced shyly at
968



GEORGE MOORE



him out of the corners of her eyes as she introduced
him to her mistress.

' This is my son, ma'am.'

Mrs. Barfield held out her hand to the young soldier.
' I have heard a great deal about you from your
mother.'

' And I of you, ma'am. You've been very kind to
my mother. I don't know how to thank you.'
And in silence they walked towards the house.

Esther Waters

550 Hail and Farewell I

IT was very sad leaving those ten years of my
life, and next morning, a grey misty morning in
February, the train took me to Kingstown, a very
different departure from the one that I had long been
meditating. The ideal departure should have been
on an evening in May, and with the golden west
behind me I should have watched from the vessel's
stern the beautiful outlines of the coast and the lovely
shapes of Howth, thinking a last farewell. I should
have murmured the words of Catullus when he
journeyed over land and sea to burn the body of his
brother, and to fit them to my circumstance a change
of a single word would have been enough :

Atque in Perpetuum, Mater, Ave atque Valk.
Our dreams and our circumstances are often in
conflict, and never were they in greater opposition
than the day the train took me from Westland Row
to Kingstown — a long, barren tract of sand : a grey
sky hanging low over the grey sea without a ripple in
it, like glass. If the evening had been a golden evening
my heart might have overflowed with fine sentiments ;

969



GEORGE MOORE



it is on golden evenings that fine sentiments overflow
the heart ; then it is like crystal that the least touch
will break ; but on a cold, bleak, February morning
the prophet is as uninspired as his humblest fellow,
and a very humble fellow, forgetful of Ireland, for-
getful of Catholicism, forgetful of literature, went
below to think of the friends he had left behind him —
/E and the rest. Hail and Farewell I Vale

CHARLES CANNAN

AND 1858-1919

ROBERT W. CHAPMAN

i88r-

55 j Ingram 'By water

i

AT the Clarendon Press, to which so much devoted
JLx. service is given by the members of its Board,
Bywater's thirty-five years of heavy work will stand
unrivalled. He took a personal interest in every piece
of sound learning that was offered for publication.

' That book of ,' he said, ' has given me a horrible

interest in mediaeval geography, and there is no subject
so remote from my proper studies.' He found — or
made — time to assist or direct all kinds of undertakings
in very different fields. He studied, for instance, not
merely all the proofs of the Oxford Classical Texts
(which were planned on the model of his own edition
of the Ethics) but huge slices of the English Dictionary.
When everyone else had failed to find the word
infer entia, and when at least one dissertation had
proved that it could not have been used in Latin, By-
water produced a quotation from Abelard. ' Murray,'
970



CHARLES CANNAN

he said, ' asked me for an early instance of foetria
(' poetry '), and when I tell you that I found it at last
in a seventh-century scholium to the Epistles of Horace,
you may imagine that it took me some time : but I am
sometimes lucky on Sunday.' Another Sunday pro-
duced — by telegram on Monday morning — a Glad-
stonian use of ' science ' in the old Oxford sense of
metaphysics. Bywater's immense bibliographical know-
ledge in many fields of learning enabled him to estimate
with accuracy the value of a new book, regarded as
a contribution to the common stock ; and his long
experience gave him an uncanny skill in predicting
without arithmetical data the cost of production and
the willingness — or unwillingness — of the public to
buy. He never missed an opportunity of getting a good
piece of work before the world ; and if he sometimes
set limits to an enterprise, or relegated what was
conceived to be a book ' to the pages of a learned
periodical,' it was not a scholar's hypercriticism but
a practical man's estimate of possibilities and values
that suggested his caution. To all the problems of
practical administration he brought a very shrewd and
incisive appreciation of the governing factors ; and in
his long tenure of office the sum of his work at the
Press, or in connection with it, must be quite com-
parable to that which eminent private publishers find
necessary for their business.

The Journal of Philology

a

THE subject of my portrait was a great scholar,
as only those few can be who laboriously cultivate
a rare natural gift. The penetralia of the ancient
world are not to be reached save through the long

971



ROBERT W. CHAPMAN



and dusty corridors of modern learning ; and only by
a saving grace of genius will the student reach the
farther end with senses unimpaired. Our scholar
knew the history of classical learning as it is unlikely it
will ever be known again, and read ancient literature
with a taste and feeling undimmed by a cobweb. He
told me once, he had read the Choephoroe in the train
that morning : ' You know, it 's monstrously good.'
The quotation does feeble justice to my vivid sense of
his being as intimate with Aeschylus as he was with
Browning, and as intimate with Politian as with either.
He was so profoundly versed in the literature and the
manners of many ages, that he would speak of Sir
Thomas More, or of Burke, very much as he spoke of
Swinburne ; as if he had known them.

Few even of his friends, I imagine, suspected the
prodigious range of his attainments. He did not
suspect it himself. He had no vulgar avidity of informa-
tion or conceit of versatility, and of many branches of
modern scientific and mechanical knowledge was con-
tent to remain as ignorant as a gentleman need be.
He acquired his knowledge with an easy deliberation,
and kept it by mere tenacity and a sure instinct for
selection. In conversation his native courtesy chose
subjects with which he knew his interlocutor to be
familiar ; and the Renaissance scholar who knew that
he lived on terms of close intimacy with Erasmus and
the Scaligers might well remain in ignorance of his
equal familiarity with Diogenes Laertius, or the Eliza-
bethan dramatists, or the historians of the Peninsular
War. Till he warmed to a subject his knowledge was
always shy ; he was not to be drawn ; and it was felt
that the attempt would be indecent. The loftiness of
his own standard was more surely betrayed by the
972



ROBERT W. CHAPMAN



alarm he evinced at the rare discovery of a gap in his
knowledge. At a meeting of a learned society over
which he presided, a member, while reading a com-
mentator's note, boggled at a word and applied to the
president for its meaning. ' Sicihcus — sicihcus J '
There was a silence as he made his way to the dictionary.
' Sicihcus. It means the forty-eighth part of an as,
and, by metonymy, it means a comma.' Then, replac-
ing the book and turning to his audience, in accents of
unfeigned dismay — ' I didn't know that ! '

The Portrait of a Scholar

FRANCIS THOMPSON

1859-1907

552 Shelley

ENCHANTED child, born into a world unchild-
like ; spoiled darling of Nature, playmate of her
elemental daughters ; ' pard-hke spirit, beautiful
and swift,' laired amidst the burning fastnesses of his
own fervid mind ; bold foot along the verges of
precipitous dream ; light leaper from crag to crag of
inaccessible fancies ; towering Genius, whose soul
rose like a ladder between heaven and earth with the
angels of song ascending and descending it ; — he is
shrunken into the little vessel of death, and sealed
with the unshatterable seal of doom, and cast down
deep below the rolling tides of Time.

Mighty meat for little guests, when the heart of
Shelley was laid in the cemetery of Caius Cestius !
Beauty, music, sweetness, tears — the mouth of the
worm has fed of them all. Into that sacred bridal-
gloom of death where he holds his nuptials with
eternity let not our rash speculations follow him ;

973



FRANCIS THOMPSON



let us hope rather that as, amidst material nature,
where our dull eyes see only ruin, the finer eye of
science has discovered life in putridity and vigour in
decay, seeing dissolution even and disintegration,
which in the mouth of man symbolize disorder, to
be in the works of God undeviating order, and the
manner of our corruption to be no less wonderful than
the manner of our health, — so, amidst the super-
natural universe, some tender undreamed surprise of
life in doom awaited that wild nature, which, worn by
warfare with itself, its Maker, and all the world, now

Sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
The beggar's nurse, and Csesar's.

Shelley

KENNETH GRAHAME

1859-

553 The 'tyman %oad

ALL the roads of our neighbourhood were cheerful
Jl\. and friendly, having each of them pleasant
qualities of their own ; but this one seemed different
from the others in its masterful suggestion of a serious
purpose, speeding you along with a strange uplifting
of the heart. The others tempted chiefly with their
treasures of hedge and ditch ; the rapt surprise of the
first lords-and-ladies, the rustle of a field-mouse, the
splash of a frog ; while cool noses of brother-beasts
were pushed at you through gate or gap.

A loiterer you had need to be, did you choose one
of them ; so many were the tiny hands thrust out to
detain you, from this side and that. But this one
was of a sterner sort, and even in its shedding off of
bank and hedgerow as it marched straight and full for
974



KENNETH GRAHAME



the open downs^ it seemed to declare its contempt for
adventitious trappings to catch the shallow-pated. . .

' The Knights' Road ' we children had named it,
from a sort of feeling that, if from any quarter at all,
it would be down this track we might some day see
Lancelot and his peers come pacing on their great
war-horses ; supposing that any of the stout band
still survived, in nooks and unexplored places. Grown-
up people sometimes spoke of it as the ' Pilgrims'
Way ' ; but I didn't know much about pilgrims —
except Walter in the Horselberg story. Him I some-
times saw, breaking with haggard eyes out of yonder
copse, and calling to the pilgrims as they hurried along
on their desperate march to the Holy City, where
peace and pardon were awaiting them. ' All roads
lead to Rome ', I had heard somebody say ; and
I had taken the remark very seriously, of course, and
puzzled over it many days. There must have been
some mistake, I concluded at last ; but of one road
at least I intuitively felt it to be true. . .

Rome ! It was fascinating to think that it lay at the
other end of this white ribbon that rolled itself off from
my feet over the distant downs. I was not quite so un-
instructed as to imagine I could reach it that afternoon ;
but some day, I thought, if things went on being as un-
pleasant as they were now — some day ... we would see.

The Golden Age

554 The Water T(at and the Sea T(at

BY this time their meal was over, and the Sea-
farer, refreshed and strengthened, his voice more
vibrant, his eye lit with a brightness that seemed
caught from some far-away sea-beacon, filled his glass

975



KENNETH GRAHAME



with the red and glowing vintage of the South, and,
leaning towards the Water Rat, compelled his gaze
and held him, body and soul, while he talked. Those
eyes were of the changing foam-streaked grey-green
of leaping Northern seas ; in the glass shone a hot
ruby that seemed the very heart of the South, beating
for him who had courage to respond to its pulsation.
The twin lights, the shifting grey and the steadfast
red, mastered the Water Rat and held him bound,
fascinated, powerless. The quiet world outside their
rays receded far away and ceased to be. And the talk,
the wonderful talk flowed on — or was it speech
entirely, or did it pass at times into song — chanty of
the sailors weighing the dripping anchor, sonorous
hum of the shrouds in a tearing North -Easter, ballad
of the fisherman hauling his nets at sundown against
an apricot sky, chords of guitar and mandoline from
gondola or caique i Did it change into the cry of the
wind, plaintive at first, angrily shrill as it freshened,
rising to a tearing whistle, sinking to a musical trickle
of air from the leech of the bellying sail? All these
sounds the spellbound listener seemed to hear, and
with them the hungry complaint of the gulls and the
sea-mews, the soft thunder of the breaking wave, the
cry of the protesting shingle. Back into speech again
it passed, and with beating heart he was following
the adventures of a dozen seaports, the fights, the
escapes, the rallies, the comradeships, the gallant under-
takings ; or he searched islands for treasure, fished in
still lagoons and dozed day-long on warm white sand.
Of deep-sea fishings he heard tell, and mighty silver
gatherings of the mile-long net ; of sudden perils,
noise of breakers on a moonless night, or the tall bows
of the great liner taking shape overhead through the
976



KENNETH GRAHAME



fog ; of the merry home-coming, the headland
rounded, the harbour lights opened out ; the groups
seen dimly on the quay, the cheery hail, the splash
of the hawser ; the trudge up the steep little street
towards the comforting glow of red-curtained windows.

Lastly, in his waking dream it seemed to him that
the Adventurer had risen to his feet, but was still
speaking, still holding him fast with his sea-grey eyes.

* And now,' he was softly saying, ' I take to the road
again, holding on south-westwards for many a long
and dusty day ; till at last I reach the little grey sea
town I know so well, that clings along one steep side
of the harbour. There through dark doorways you
look down flights of stone steps, overhung by great
pink tufts of valerian and ending in a patch of sparkling
blue water. The little boats that lie tethered to the
rings and stanchions of the old sea-wall are gaily
painted as those I clambered in and out of in my own
childhood ; the salmon leap on the flood tide, schools
of mackerel flash and play past quay-sides and fore-
shores, and by the windows the great vessels glide,
night and day, up to their moorings or forth to the
open sea. There, sooner or later, the ships of all
seafaring nations arrive ; and there, at its destined
hour, the ship of my choice will let go its anchor.
I shall take my time, I shall tarry and bide, till at last
the right one lies waiting for me, warped out into mid-
stream, loaded low, her bowsprit pointing down
harbour. I shall slip on board, by boat or along
hawser ; and then one morning I shall wake to the
song and tramp of the sailors, the clink of the capstan,
and the rattle of the anchor-chain coming merrily in.
We shall break out the jib and the foresail, the white
houses on the harbour side will glide slowly past us

977



KENNETH GRAHAME



as she gathers steering-way, and the voyage will have
begun ! As she forges towards the headland she will
clothe herself with canvas ; and then, once outside,
the sounding slap of great green seas as she heels to
the wind, pointing South !

And you, you will come too, young brother ; for
the days pass, and never return, and the South stdl
waits for you. Take the Adventure, heed the call,
now ere the irrevocable moment passes ! 'Tis but
a banging of the door behind you, a blithesome step
forward, and you are out of the old life and into the
new ! Then some day, some day long hence, jog home
here if you will, when the cup has been drained and the
play has been played, and sit down by your quiet river
with a store of goodly memories for company. You
can easily overtake me on the road, for you are young,
and I am ageing and go softly. I will linger, and look
back ; and at last I will surely see you coming, eager
and light-hearted, with all the South in your face ! '

The voice died away and ceased, as an insect's
tiny trumpet dwindles swiftly into silence ; and the
Water Rat, paralysed and staring, saw at last but
a distant speck on the white surface of the road.

The Wind in the Willows

HENRY FIELDING HALL

1S59-

555 zA ^Burmese on the English

IT is not only that when you get an order you obey
it, though it come from so very far away — that is
wonderful enough to us — but you obey it willingly.
You act as if it was something you wanted to do your-
self, something you thought of in yourself for your
978



HENRY FIELDING HALL

own advantage. You understand not only what the
order says but what it means, almost as if you yourself
had said it. You are not servants who obey orders,
you are as the hand or foot that acts as the brain
designs. You live here widely separated, many
thousand miles from your small island, but yet you
are not divided from it. You are all held together by
nerves in the invisible air that make you one. Therefore
your Government is you, not your master, your teacher,
your commander, but yourself. You feel as we do
about our family and our village, that it is ourselves.
That is what we notice and wonder at in you. When
we see two or three Englishmen alone governing a great
district, you appear to us not individuals but tiny
finger-tips of a great living thing whose heart and brain
are far away. Yet if the finger-tip be touched the
whole responds. And what one of you does, that is
the act of the whole.

The Inward Light

OLIVE SCHREINER

1859-1920

556 Waldo

SITTING there with his arms folded on his knees,
and his hat slouched down over his face, Waldo
looked out into the yellow sunshine that tinted even
the very air with the colour of ripe corn, and was
happy.

He was an uncouth creature with small learning,
and no prospect in the future but that of making
endless tables and stone walls, yet it seemed to him as
he sat there that life was a rare and very rich thing.
He rubbed his hands in the sunshine. Ah, to live on so,

979



OLIVE SCHREINER



year after year, how well ! Always in the present ;
letting each day glide, bringing its own labour, and its
own beauty ; the gradual lighting up of the hills, night
and the stars, firelight and the coals ! To live on so,
calmly, far from the paths of men ; and to look at the
lives of clouds and insects ; to look deep into the heart
of flowers, and see how lovingly the pistil and the
stamens nestle there together ; and to see in the thorn-
pods how the little seeds suck their life through the
delicate curled-up string, and how the little embryo
sleeps inside ! Well, how well, to sit so on one side,
taking no part in the world's life ; but when great
men blossom into books looking into those flowers
also, to see how the world of men too opens beauti-
fully, leaf after leaf. Ah ! life is delicious ; well to
live long, and see the darkness breaking, and the day
coming. The day when soul shall not thrust back
soul that would come to it ; when men shall not be
driven to seek solitude, because of the crying out of
their hearts for love and sympathy. Well to live long
and see the new time breaking ! Well to live long ;
life is sweet, sweet, sweet ! In his breast pocket, where
of old the broken slate used to be, there was now a little
dancing shoe of his friend who was sleeping. He could
feel it when he folded his arm tight against his breast ;
and that was well also. He drew his hat lower over his
eyes, and sat so motionless that the chickens thought
he was asleep, and gathered closer around him. One
even ventured to peck at his boot ; but he ran away
quickly. Tiny, yellow fellow that he was, he knew
that men were dangerous ; even sleeping they might
awake. But Waldo did not sleep, and coming back
from his sunshiny dream, stretched out his hand for
the tiny thing to mount. But the chicken eyed the
980



OLIVE SCHREINER



hand askance, and then ran off to hide under its mother's
wing, and from beneath it it sometimes put out its
round head to peep at the great figure sitting there.
Presently its brothers ran off after a little white moth,
and it ran out to join them ; and when the moth
fluttered away over their heads they stood looking up
disappointed, and then ran back to their mother.

Waldo through his half-closed eyes looked at them.
Thinking, fearing, craving, those tiny sparks of brother
life, what were they, so real there in that old yard on
that sunshiny afternoon ? A few years — where would
they be ? Strange little brother spirits ! He stretched
his hand towards them, for his heart went out to them ;
but not one of the little creatures came nearer him,
and he watched them gravely for a time ; then he
smiled, and began muttering to himself after his old
fashion. Afterwards he folded his arms upon his knees,
and rested his forehead on them. And so he sat there
in the yellow sunshine, muttering, muttering, mutter-
ing to himself.

It was not very long after when Em came out at the
back-door with a towel thrown across her head, and
in her hand a cup of milk.

' Ah,' she said, coming close to him, ' he is sleeping
now. He will find it when he wakes, and be glad of it.'

She put it down upon the ground beside him. The
mother-hen was at work still among the stones, but
the chickens had climbed about him, and were perching
on him. One stood upon his shoulder, and rubbed its
little head softly against his black curls ; another tried
to balance itself on the very edge of the old felt hat.
One tiny fellow stood upon his hand, and tried to
crow ; another had nestled itself down comfortably
on the old coat-sleeve, and gone to sleep there.

981



OLIVE SCHREINER



Em did not drive them away ; but she covered the
glass softly at his side. ' He will wake soon,' she said,
' and be glad of it.'

But the chickens were wiser.

The Story of an African Farm

JOHN ANDREW HAMILTON,
LORD SUMNER OF IBSTONE

1859-

557 'Bowman v. Secular Society Ltd. :
"Judgement

THE words, as well as the acts, which tend to
endanger society differ from time to time in pro-
portion as society is stable or insecure in fact, or is
believed by its reasonable members to be open to
assault. In the present day meetings or processions
are held lawful which a hundred and fifty years ago
would have been deemed seditious, and this is not
because the law is weaker or has changed, but because
the times having changed, society is stronger than
before. In the present day reasonable men do not
apprehend the dissolution or downfall of society
because religion is publicly assailed by methods not
scandalous. Whether it is possible that in the future
irreligious attacks, designed to undermine fundamental
institutions of our society, may come to be criminal
in themselves, as constituting a public danger, is a
matter that does not arise. The fact that opinion
grounded on experience has moved one way does not
in law preclude the possibility of its moving on fresh
experience in the other ; nor does it bind succeeding
982



LORD JUSTICE SUMNER



generations, when conditions have again changed.
After all, the question whether a given opinion is
a danger to society is a question of the times and
is a question of fact. I desire to say nothing that
would limit the right of society to protect itself by
process of law from the dangers of the moment, what-
ever that right may be, but only to say that, experience
having proved dangers once thought real to be now
negligible, and dangers once very possibly imminent
to have now passed away, there is nothing in the
general rules as to blasphemy and irreligion, as known
to the law, which prevents us from varying their
application to the particular circumstances of our time
in accordance with that experience.

Law Reports

CHARLES WHIBLEY

1S59-

555 'Rabelais

HIS scheme of education was more wholesome and
practical than the vaunted system of our public
schools. Read how Gargantua was instructed by
Ponocrates, and note that nothing was neglected that
might strengthen his body or set a fine edge upon his
wit. Good order was always observed, and the young
giant was even ' combed, curled, trimmed and per-
fumed '. Then after three good hours of lecture, he
went into the meadows, where they played at the ball,
' most gallantly exercising their bodies, as formerly they
had done their mindes '. And sport was as little an
infliction as study : ' All their play was but in liberty,
for they left off when they pleased, and that was
commonly when they did sweat over all their body, or

983



CHARLES WHIBLEY



were otherwayes weary. Then were they very well
wiped and rubbed, shifted their shirts, and, walking
soberly, went to see if dinner was ready. . . In the
mean time Master Appetite came, and then very
orderly sate they down at table ; at the beginning of
the meale, there was read some pleasant history of the
warlike actions of former times, until he had taken
a glasse of wine '. Thereafter were discussed ' the
nature and efficacy of all that was served at table ',
and such appropriate authors as Athenaeus, Pliny, and
Aristotle were quoted. At last, after some ' fine
Canticks made in praise of the divine bounty and
munificence ', cards were brought, not for play, but
to learn a thousand pretty tricks founded on arithmetic,
and so the science of numbers was encouraged. Then
came music and sports of all kinds, until at ' last they
prayed unto God the Creator, in falling down before
him, and strengthening their faith towards him, and
glorifying him for his boundlesse bounty* for the time
that was past, they recommended themselves to his
divine clemency for the future, which being done, they
went to bed, and betook themselves to their repose and
rest Thus he sketched an education which might
have befitted a great king, without a word of ribaldry
or scorn, and in such a spirit as proves that he gravely
condemned the lazy, lither system of the monasteries.

Being a true man of letters, he loved best of all the
' celestial manna of honest literature ', and he has
composed in Gargantua's letter to Pantagruel the
simple gospel of humanism. This eloquent plea for
the liberal arts, for the dignity of the classics, above
all for the supremacy of Greek, is as good an argument
against the superstition of the Church as may be found
in the books of the century. Moreover, the famous
984



CHARLES WHIBLEY



letter is inspired with a lofty intelligence and a wise
fervour which the enemies of Rabelais do not suspect.
' But because, as the wise man Solomon saith ' — thus
he writes — ' Wisdome entereth not into a malicious
minde ; that knowledge without conscience is but the
ruine of the soule, it behooveth thee to serve, to love,
to feare God, and on him to cast all thy thoughts and
all thy hope, and by faith formed in charity to cleave
unto him, so that thou mayest never be separated from
him by thy sins.' Knowledge, without conscience, is
but the ruin of the soul ! The man who echoed that
profound sentence was no buffoon, and it is only a
perverse criticism which has obscured the real char-
acter of his book. The world has lived nearly four
centuries since Rabelais, and we are not within a league
of realizing his noble, humane ideal of education.

Literary Portraits

559 Q eor g e 'Brummel

BRUMMEL, then, was to himself a work of art,
which should be embellished by perfect manners,
perfect taste, and a cunning tailor ; nor is it sur-
prising that the finished work inspired the whole of
English society with an admiring awe. . . He arrived
at the moment when the democratic spirit had killed
elegance. The Revolution had done its work, and
Charles Fox, himself a Dandy of the second class, had
preached the doctrine of equality. The old pic-
turesqueness was dead ; the cocked hat had been
vanquished by the topper ; and Brummel had no
less a task than to construct a noble costume from
this wreckage of republican principles. And what
poor material had he whereon to work ! A coat, a

985



CHARLES WHIBLEY



waistcoat, and a pair of trousers ! Yet he was no fanatic
to restore the ancient mode ; his greatness consisted
in the proper adaptation of the poor materials left to
his hand. He did not neglect their shape and contour ;
but that their poverty of design might be less noticed,
he drew off the attention to the cravat.

This, indeed, was the masterpiece of his invention.
The cravat of Brummel was the envy of crowned
heads ; yet nothing could have been more simple. It
was half-starched, and it went twice round ; its glory
began and ended in the perfect arrangement of its
folds ; and Brummel was so delicate an artist that he
discarded a cravat which was not flawless at the first
attempt. He would insult neither himself nor his
cravat by a second trial, and the famous story is a
proper index of his greatness. A friend one day
encountered his valet carrying with him a tray-full of
discarded cravats. ' What are these ? ' asked the eager
friend, with half a hope that he might penetrate a
long-kept secret. ' These replied the valet, ' are
some of our failures.' And in that simple phrase did
Brummel reveal his true, imperishable temperament.

Introduction to The Pageantry of Lt/e



JAMES MATTHEW BARRIE

1860-

560 The Qhairs

ON the day I was born we bought six hair-bottomed
chairs, and in our little house it was an event, the
first great victory in a woman's long campaign ; how
they had been laboured for, the pound-note and the
thirty threepenny-bits they cost, what anxiety there
986



JAMES MATTHEW BARRIE

was about the purchase, the show they made in posses-
sion of the west room, my father's unnatural coolness
when he brought them in (but his face was white) — I so
often heard the tale afterwards, and shared as boy
and man in so many similar triumphs, that the coming
of the chairs seems to be something I remember,
as if I had jumped out of bed on that first day, and run
ben to see how they looked. I am sure my mother's
feet were ettling to be ben long before they could be
trusted, and that the moment after she was left alone
with me she was discovered barefooted in the west
room, doctoring a scar (which she had been the first
to detect) on one of the chairs, or sitting on them
regally, or withdrawing and re-opening the door
suddenly to take the six by surprise. And then,
I think, a shawl was flung over her (it is strange to me
to think it was not I who ran after her with the shawl),
and she was escorted sternly back to bed and reminded
that she had promised not to budge, to which her
reply was probably that she had been gone but an
instant, and the implication that therefore she had
not been gone at all. Thus was one little bit of
her revealed to me at once : I wonder if I took note
of it.

Neighbours came in to see the boy and the chairs.
I wonder if she deceived me when she affected to think
that there were others like us, or whether I saw through
her from the first, she was so easily seen through.

Margaret Ogthy



987



MARY ELIZABETH COLERIDGE

1861-1907

The Knight of <£Malta : a Florentine ^Portrait
561 in the Rational (gallery

A YOUNG man, dressed in black with the White
Cross of the Knights of Malta, leans against a
parapet, holding an open letter in his hand. Behind
him is a square of blue tranquillity, brightening into
pure light towards the horizon ; on the left the usual
slender little tree, divided into symmetrical branches,
and leaves that one could count ; round about, rocks
and houses and a tiny bridge, gay in the sunshine.
The Knight stands dark and lonely. The letter that
he holds has blotted out the landscape. Henceforward
he will not notice bright colouring.

' The world is painted in black and white.'

He has the dreamy abstraction of a man whose eyes,
fixed as they are upon the world within, see little of
that without. It is impossible to help gazing at them ;
who could resist peering into his neighbour's house,
if he were sure that he should find the occupant, and
that the occupant would never see him? The lamp
of this fair house was Memory ; it still burns through
the windows. Nine times out of ten it is Memory
that makes a man gentle, and gentleness is the soul
of a Knight's courage. The Knight is young. There
is but a slight down on the upper lip, and cheek and
brow are smooth, while the mouth is tremulous with
emotion ; yet there is nothing of the rebellion of
youth against the first order it receives to march
joylessly. He is a dignified person ; he has not borne,
988



MARY ELIZABETH COLERIDGE

but he knows how to bear. The Knight's fidelity
is his. . .

Tar : ublia : chi : Men : eima. ' Slowly he forgets
who loves well.' That is the inscription upon the
parapet.

Non Sequitur

WALTER RALEIGH

1861-1922

562 The Hook of the Qourtier

i

THAT the vogue of the book in England should
have coincided exactly with the Elizabethan Age
is something other than an accident. The literature
of that age was a literature of the Court, as surely as
the literature of the age of Anne was a literature 01
the Town. The way to political influence, to social
advancement, to power and consideration and fame,
lay through the Court, in England as in Italy. Now
that the Court has dwindled into a drawing-room, it
is perhaps not wholly easy to realize what once it
meant to the nation. It was the centre, not of govern-
ment alone, but of the fine arts : the exemplar of
culture and civilization. Few great Englishmen of the
nineteenth century have been intimately connected
with the Court ; few indeed of the great Elizabethans
were not. The names of Charles Darwin, Robert
Browning, and Charles George Gordon on the one
hand, of Francis Bacon, Edmund Spenser, and Sir
Philip Sidney on the other, sufficiently point the con-
trast. Even Shakespeare, the High Bailiff's son, was
something of a Courtier ; he paid the most magnificent

989



WALTER RALEIGH



of courtly tributes to Queen Elizabeth in certain
lines :

And the imperial votaress passed on
In maiden meditation, fancy free :

and he (or his editors) inserted in the play of Macbeth
sundry passages which can only be called skilful pieces
of flattery designed to gratify King James. In those
flourishing days of adventure, the successful adventurer
found himself, sooner or later, brought into contact
with the Court. Francis Drake, when he had sailed
round the world, entertained Queen Elizabeth on
board his ship at Deptford ; and William Lithgow,
the Scottish pedestrian, after escaping with his life
from the tortures of the Spanish Inquisition, was
carried on a feather-bed to Theobalds, that he might
narrate the wonders of his travels to King James.
The Courtier was the embodiment and type of the
civilization of the Renaissance, as the Orator was the
typical product of the civilization of ancient Rome.
And the treatises of Cicero and Quintilian, wherein
is set forth the character of the perfect orator, have
their exact counterpart in the books written by the
Italians of the sixteenth century for the instruction
of the Perfect Courtier.

n

In our own time, if the very existence of the Scholar-
Gentleman be threatened, it is not so much by revolu-
tionary morals as by the enormous growth of specialized
knowledge, which divides human life into many de-
partments, organized under learned barbarism. But
the many-sided ideal has always been strong in Eng-
land. Even in the eighteenth century, Congreve
surprised and disgusted Voltaire by refusing the
99°



WALTER RALEIGH



status of a professional author ; and it is a criticism
of modern France, passed upon English painters, that
they aspire to be grands seigneurs. There was some-
thing profoundly sane, after all, in the ambitions that
built New Place and Abbotsford. At the close of
a revolutionary century, now that the fogs of a crude
moral theory are dissipating, and the dream of a
mechanical Utopia, a mere nightmare produced by
a surfeit of science, is passing away, it is time to
remember our ancestry. Our proudest title is not
that we are the contemporaries of Darwin, but that
we are the descendants of Shakespeare ; we too are
men of the Renaissance, inheritors of that large and
noble conception of humanity and art to which a
monument is erected in this Book of the Courtier.

Sir Thomas Hoby

563 Quae stulta sunt mundi elegit Deus

THESE two moods, the mood of Quixote and the
mood of Sancho, seem to divide between them
most of the splendours and most of the comforts of
human life. It is rare to find either mood in its
perfection. A man who should consistently indulge
in himself the mood of the unregenerate Sancho would
be a rogue, though, if he preserved good temper in his
doings, he would be a pleasant rogue. The man who
should maintain in himself the mood of Quixote would
be something very like a saint. The saints of the
Church Militant would find no puzzle and no obscurity
in the character of the Knight of La Mancha. Some
of them, perhaps, would understand, better than Don
Quixote understood, that the full record of his doings,
compiled by Cervantes, is both a tribute to the saintly

991



WALTER RALEIGH



character, and a criticism of it. They certainly could
not fail to discover the religious kernel of the book,
as the world, in the easy confidence of its own superio-
rity, has failed to discover it. They would know that
whoso loseth his life shall save it ; they would not find
it difficult to understand how Don Quixote, and, in
his own degree, Sancho, was willing to be a fool, that
he, and the world with him, might be made wise.
Above all, they would appreciate the more squalid
misadventures of Don Quixote, for, unlike the public,
which recognizes the saint by his aureole, they would
know, none better, that the way they have chosen is
the way of contempt, and that Christianity was
nursed in a manger.

Don Qutxole

MAURICE HEWLETT

1861-1923

564 <£Mascalls

WE cut out of the high road by a sunk lane between
dogwood hedges and ragged elms, I and a young
squire of my acquaintance who lives and reigns not
far from here. Beyond the trees there showed up
the gable-end and chimneys of a house, and anon we
came to a flint-and-stone wall, a blank space of
masonry, wherein one barred window. The place
might have been a convent in some Tuscan vicolo, so
blind a look it had ; but in our country, when a little
house faces the sun, it has no use for windows to the
north. We reached a door in the wall, tumbled down
a flight of steps, and stood, as it were, upon the shore
of a lake of light, with nothing before us but sunshot
air, and across that radiant emptiness the further hills
992



MAURICE HEWLETT



rolling away towards Somerset. Two great ilexes
guard the entry, and make so dry a shelter that the
angle of the wall with their covering serves as a wood-
shed. A terrace-walk runs along the rim of the vale,
from which the garden, enclosed in its white wall and
red-tile coping, falls sharply down to the river. The
wall ends there in a freakish gazebo overhanging the
water, which once might have covered a boat-house,
but now has a homelier use. Upon the terrace is
Mascalls, the old stone house.

Mascalls has a quiet and seemly, plain face, much
like that of some old labourer which has been bleached
and scorched by the suns of fifty summers. It would
be bald-looking, almost too severely to the purpose,
but for one ample bow-window, the after-thought of
some Mascall of the Regency. That was about the
date at which it took its present shape, for while the
ashlar might be of any age, and no doubt had served
a much older house, its windows were all sashed in the
way of 1 8 10 or so, and a line of billets had been set
under the eaves when a tile roof took the place of
thatch. But antiquity was below us and about us—
a mullioned window to the cellar, a huge tithe barn
close by, built in Pelasgian blocks. The front door,
with a coquettish stuccoed pediment which reminded
me somehow of Jane Austen, stood open ; and there,
bowing, appealing with her faded eyes, stood the
wife of the last Mascall who could be suffered to hold
Mascalls, a patient, sad-faced woman, rendered by
cares rather than years to look any age. She made us
free of the place with a courtesy which never fails her
countrywomen, though one of us had decreed that
morning that she must leave. We made our rueful
survey. We saw the wreck of a sturdy old house. From
2830 k k 993



MAURICE HEWLETT



attic to cellar the tale was the same. Parting walls,
sagging ceilings, gaping floor-boards, dry-rotten joists,
damp-eaten, rat-gnawed, it was falling about the
family's heads. To put the place in order again would
cost a small fortune in these days, which could only
be recovered by rent. But rent was what the family
could not find — so what were you to do ? My friend
was humane, but he had to pay his way. His land was
not a luxury, it was his livelihood. He was in as
mortgagee on a foreclosure. The word had been
spoken. Mascall could no longer hold Mascalls.

Yet what a pleasant seat for an old house, on a ridge
above the eddying chalk-stream, full in the sun, with
a view over the valley into the heart of the West !
What a shady orchard of cider-apples, what a sheltered,
ripe old walled-garden, what a green water-meadow
edging the brook ! The place is so much ' seated in
the mean ', as Shakespeare says ; it has the homely
comfort, the plainness, the gentle every-dayness which
makes our country beloved of all who come to know it.
A country of half-tones, of silver-greys and amber-
yellows, of mild wet winds, misted mornings and tem-
perate noons ; a country of Quaker habit. To be
driven from it, if you have lived there all your life,
and laboured its earth, and gone out and in ; brought
your bride there, got your children there, seen your
old father die and borne him thence to the church-
yard, returning then to know that you are Mascall of
Mascalls ; as it was in the beginning, is now . . . and
then — to slip back and back, to feel your hold loosening,
to be shiftless to help, in your own holding on suffer-
ance, by squatter's right . . . and then — bidden to
go ! How can a man bear that ?

Wiltshire Essays

994



ARTHUR CHRISTOPHER BENSON



1862-1925

565 Henry Tiradshaw

WHEN one speaks of Bradshaw's ' work ', it is
hard to make the uninitiated quite understand
either its extent, its importance, or its perfection.
He knew more about printed books than any man
living — he could tell at a glance the date and country,
generally the town, at which a book was published.
And the enormous range of this subject cannot be
explained without a technical knowledge of the same.
He was one of the foremost of Chaucer scholars, a very
efficient linguist in range (though for reading, not
speaking purposes), as, for instance, in the case of the
old Breton language, which he evolved from notes
and glosses, scribbled between the lines and on
margins of Mass books — and his joy at the discovery
of a word that he had suspected but never encountered
was delightful to see. He could acquire a language
for practical purposes with great rapidity — as, for
instance, Armenian, which he began on a Thursday
morning at Venice, and could read, so as to decipher
titles for cataloguing, on Saturday night. He had
a close and unrivalled knowledge of cathedral statutes
and constitutions. He was an advanced student in
the origins of liturgies — especially Irish — and, indeed,
in the whole of Irish literature and printing he was
supreme — and, finally, he was by common consent
the best palaeographist, or critic of the date of MSS.,
in the world.

The story of his adventure in the Parisian Library
is worth recording here : a book had been lost for
nearly a century ; he went over to Paris to see if he

995



ARTHUR CHRISTOPHER BENSON



could discover it. Search was fruitless, though there
was a strong presumption as to the part of the library
where it would be found. He stood in one of the
classes describing its probable appearance to the
librarian, and to illustrate it said, ' About the height,
thickness, and of similar binding to this ', taking a
book out of the shelves as he did so. It was the
missing volume. . .

The way in which all this work was done, all this
knowledge was accumulated, was, among the other
peculiarities of his genius, the most amazing. No man
ever seemed to have more leisure ; he would talk with
perfect readiness not only on any special matter that
any friend wished to consult him on, but he enjoyed
trivial, leisurely gossip, and never showed impatience
to continue his work, or the least desire to return to
it. The secret was that he never left off. Except for
rare holidays, visits to relations or foreign tours, he
never left Cambridge for years. His hours were most
perplexing ; he would generally work very late at
night, sometimes till four or five in the morning,
if there was much work on hand, go to the library
about eleven, return for lunch, then back to the
library again, with perhaps a visit to a Board or
Syndicate till tea-time — for he took no exercise except
spasmodically. Then he would go into Hall, or not, as
the fancy took him, on the majority of days not doing
so, and tasting nothing but tea and bread-and-butter
in his rooms — and then from eight o'clock he would
sit there, working if uninterrupted, but with his
doors generally open to welcome all intruders, cease-
lessly, patiently acquiring, amassing, disintegrating the
enormous mass of delicate and subtle information
which not only did he never forget, but all of which
996



ARTHUR CHRISTOPHER BENSON



he seemed to carry on the surface, and carry so lightly
and easily too — for he did not appear to be erudite —
he never played the role of the learned man, though
with acquirements as ponderous and detailed, and to
the generality of people as uninteresting, as the real
or the fictitious Casaubon. . .

And in an instant the whole structure breaks and
melts before our eyes : the knowledge gone, God
knows whither : the centre of so many quiet activities,
of so many dependent lives slipped from its place.
However often we say to ourselves that nothing runs
to waste, that hoarded experience — gathered painfully
in life and seemingly only to be applied in life — thus
vanishing in an instant is hidden, not gone, the blank
is there. As Bradshaw himself said to a friend after
a great trial that he had told him of, which seemed to
have in it no wholesome flavour, to be nothing either
in prospect or in retrospect but the very root of
bitterness itself, ' Everything is the result of something
— whether it is our own fault or not, it means some-
thing : what we have to do is to try and interpret it.'

Essays

GOLDSWORTHY LOWES DICKINSON

1862-

566 Literature in Qathay

IN China letters are respected not merely to a degree
but in a sense which must seem, I think, to you
unintelligible and overstrained. But there is a reason
for it. Our poets and literary men have taught their
successors, for long generations, to look for good not
in wealth, not in power, not in miscellaneous activity,
but in a trained, a choice, an exquisite appreciation of

997



GOLDSWORTHY LOWES DICKINSON



the most simple and universal relations of life. To
feel, and in order to feel to express, or at least to under-
stand the expression of all that is lovely in Nature, of
all that is poignant and sensitive in man, is to us in
itself a sufficient end. A rose in a moonlit garden, the
shadow of trees on the turf, almond blossom, scent of
pine, the wine-cup and the guitar ; these and the
pathos of life and death, the long embrace, the hand
stretched out in vain, the moment that glides for ever
away, with its freight of music and light, into the
shadow and hush of the haunted past, all that we have,
all that eludes us, a bird on the wing, a perfume
escaped on the gale — to all these things we are trained
to respond, and the response is what we call literature.

Letters from John Chitviman

HENRY NEWBOLT

1862-

567 (gardenleigh

CHANGE has passed lightly over Gardenleigh
since the day when William the Norman's
fighting bishop, Geoffrey of Coutances, died at enmity
with Rufus, and his seventy Somerset manors passed
to the Honour of Gloucester, to be parcelled out
among the tenants of FitzHamon and De Clare.
What it was then, such in all essentials it has been ever
since. Five Colthursts, five Marlands, three Romseys,
twelve Silvaynes, and three of these new Earnshaws
from the North, have all in turn become, by descent,
by marriage, or by purchase, the stewards of the
commonwealth for Gardenleigh ; all in turn have
lived here, planted, drained and sown, hunted, and
administered the king's most rustic peace, and handed
998



HENRY NEWBOLT



on the place to their successors unimpaired in beauty.
It is true that none of them have attained high rank
or lasting fame in politics, in war, or in the arts ; but
they have filled a definite place in English life, and
a still more definite place in the history of the land of
England.

And what of that land itself? What of the few
hundred acres of it which the child-like Saxon in
some dim century named Gardenleigh? Is it not a
dream? Even as we know it, is it not the dream of
seven and twenty generations ? Year after year, life
after life, century after century, to all who have seen
it, whether as squires or serfs, natives or settlers, it
has been the fabric upon which the pattern of their
days was woven — the perfect setting of high dawns
and tender sunsets, of birth, and toil, and passion, and
pursuit ; of all joys, and many partings and inevitable
death. Now they themselves are dust, or less than
dust ; nothing is left of them but the shrines they
built, the woods they planted, the mounds in the
churchyard, and a few stones, for the most part long
since broken and illegible. But Gardenleigh is still as
green as ever. Can it be that the dream has indeed
outlasted the dreamers so utterly ? Has the slow
stream of human life had no effect upon these meadows
that it has so long watered? Are they no richer for
all this love, no more fertile to the spirit than the raw
clearings of yesterday in new-discovered countries ?
Are there no voices but ours in these old mossy woods
and sunlit gardens, no steps but ours by this lake where
the stars are mirrored in silence ? What, then, is
Time, that he should have power to make away with
the dearest memories of seven and twenty generations ?

The Old Country
999



E. (E. SOMERVILLE AND
MARTIN ROSS

(MISS VIOLET MARTIN, 1864-1915)

568 <t,4n Outpost of Ireland

BELOW the Lodge, to the south-east, the restless
sand has smothered many a landmark, obliterated
many a grave. Lie down in it, it is a soft bed ; let
it slip through your fingers, dry and fine and delicate,
while the sea line is high and blue above you, and the
light breaker strikes the slow moments in rhythm.
Saint and oratory, cloghaun and cromlech, lie deep in
its oblivion, their memory living faintly and more
faintly from lip to lip through the years ; around
the saints their halos still linger, pale in this age's
noonday, and the fishermen still strike sail at the
corner of the island to the little crumbling tower that
is supposed to mark the grave of Saint Gregory.

The ridge of the island runs in tablelands of rock,
dropping in cliffs to the sea along its south-western
face. These heights are level deserts of stone, streaked
with soft grass where the yellow vetch blazes and
a myriad wild roses lay their petals against the boulders.
Yet even these handmaids of the rock are not the
tenderest of its surprises. Look down the slits and
fissures as you step across them on a May day, and you
will see fronds of maidenhair climbing out of the
darkness and warm mud below. A month later they
will be strong and tall above the surface ; the clots
of foam may often strike them when, below their
platform, the piled-up Atlantic rolls its vastness to
the attack, with the cruel green of the updrawn wave,
with the hurl of the pent tons against crag and cliff.
1000



E. (E. SOMERVILLE



But for us, on that May morning, land and sea lay in
rapt accord, and the breast of the brimming tide was
laid to the breast of the cliff, with a low and broken
voice of joy.

Some Irish Yesterdays

JOHN BURNET

1863-

569 Ignorance

THE problem I wish to discuss is the growth of
ignorance at the present day, a problem which is
generally overlooked just because, instead of beginning
with ignorance, we fix our attention on knowledge,
which at least appears to be increasing. Moreover,
when I speak of the growth of ignorance, I am not
referring specially to what are sometimes called ' the
masses '. Among them we certainly find a great
increase, if not of knowledge, at any rate of the desire
for knowledge, and the Labour Party has a sincere
belief in education. Unfortunately they are apt to
speak as if there existed somewhere a stock of ready-
made knowledge which has only to be doled out
liberally to satisfy all needs. That was the view of
Lord Brougham and other pioneers of popular educa-
tion in the first half of the nineteenth century, but it
is altogether wrong. If we start, as we should, from
a consideration of ignorance, we shall be struck first
of all, I think, by its passivity and inertness, and this
raises a presumption that knowledge is above all. as
Plato held it to be, an activity of the soul. But, if so,
it follows that it cannot be communicated at all, except
in so far as the active soul can induce other souls to
share in its activity. What can be supplied from stock



1 00 1



JOHN BURNET

is merely the sediment of dead knowledge, though
even that is valuable, as I hope to show, since it
furnishes us with the necessary tools for the real activity
of knowing. But it is not itself the real thing. The
only knowledge worth distributing is living, first-hand
knowledge, and that, from the nature of the case, can
only be realized in its fullness by the few. It is,
however, the only reservoir from which the needs of
the many can be supplied, and it is therefore important
to consider from time to time whether it is being
maintained at the proper level. In the long run,
everything depends on higher education, and so it
remains true that the chief purpose of education is to
form an elite, not for its own sake, but for that of
society. That is Plato's doctrine. The Guardians in
the Republic are the hardest worked and least remuner-
ated class in the community, and those who have
ascended to the light of the true day must descend
once more in turn to the Cave to release the prisoners
from their bonds.

The Romanes Lecture 1923

GEORGE SANTAYANA

1863-

570 The Weather in his Soul

IET me come to the point boldly; what governs
U the Englishman is his inner atmosphere, the
weather in his soul. It is nothing particularly spiritual
or mysterious. When he has taken his exercise and is
drinking his tea or his beer and lighting his pipe , when,
in his garden or by his fire, he sprawls in an aggressively
comfortable chair ; when, well-washed and well-
brushed, he resolutely turns in church to the east and
1002



GEORGE SANTAYANA



recites the Creed (with genuflexions, if he likes genu-
flexions) without in the least implying that he believes
one word of it ; when he hears or sings the most
crudely sentimental and thinnest of popular songs,
unmoved but not disgusted ; when he makes up his
mind who is his best friend or his favourite poet ; when
he adopts a party or a sweetheart ; when he is hunting
or shooting or boating, or striding through the fields ,
when he is choosing his clothes or his profession —
never is it a precise reason, or purpose, or outer fact
that determines him ; it is always the atmosphere of
his inner man.

To say that this atmosphere was simply a sense of
physical well-being, of coursing blood and a prosperous
digestion, would be far too gross ; for while psychic
weather is all that, it is also a witness to some settled
disposition, some ripening inclination for this or that,
deeply rooted in the soul. It gives a sense of direction
in life which is virtually a code of ethics, and a religion
behind religion. On the other hand, to say it was the
vision of any ideal or allegiance to any principle would
be making it far too articulate and abstract. The
inner atmosphere, when compelled to condense into
words, may precipitate some curt maxim or over-
simple theory as a sort of war-cry ; but its puerile
language does it injustice, because it broods at a much
deeper level than language or even thought. It is
a mass of dumb instincts and allegiances, the love of
a certain quality of life, to be maintained manfully.
It is pregnant with many a stubborn assertion and
rejection. It fights under its trivial fluttering opinions
like a smoking battleship under its flags and signals ;
you must consider, not what they are, but why they
have been hoisted and will not be lowered. One is



1003



GEORGE SANTAYANA



tempted at times to turn away in despair from the most
delightful acquaintance — the picture of manliness,
grace, simplicity, and honour, apparently rich in know-
ledge and humour — because of some enormous plati-
tude he reverts to, some hopelessly stupid little dogma
from which one knows that nothing can ever liberate
him. The reformer must give him up ; but why
should one wish to reform a person so much better
than oneself ? He is like a thoroughbred horse, satis-
fying to the trained eye, docile to the light touch, and
coursing in most wonderful unison with you through
the open world. What do you care what words he
uses f Are you impatient with the lark because he
sings rather than talks ? and if he could talk, would you
be irritated by his curious opinions? Of course, if any
one positively asserts what is contrary to fact, there is
an error, though the error may be harmless ; and most
divergencies between men should interest us rather
than offend us, because they are effects of perspective,
or of legitimate diversity in experience and interests.
Trust the man who hesitates in his speech and is quick
and steady in action, but beware of long arguments
and long beards. Jupiter decided the most intricate
questions with a nod, and a very few words and no
gestures suffice for the Englishman to make his inner
mind felt most unequivocally when occasion requires.

Instinctively the Englishman is no missionary, no
conqueror. He prefers the country to the town, and
home to foreign parts. He is rather glad and relieved
if only natives will remain natives and strangers
strangers, and at a comfortable distance from himself.
Yet outwardly he is most hospitable and accepts almost
anybody for the time being ; he travels and conquers
without a settled design, because he has the instinct
1004



GEORGE SANTAYANA



of exploration. His adventures are all external ; they
change him so little that he is not afraid of them. He
carries his English weather in his heart wherever he
goes, and it becomes a cool spot in the desert, and a
steady and sane oracle amongst all the deliriums of
mankind. Never since the heroic days of Greece has
the world had such a sweet, just, boyish master. It
will be a black day for the human race when scientific
blackguards, conspirators, churls, and fanatics manage
to supplant him.

Soliloquies tn England

571 c I(eligio Stoici

THERE is a philosophic piety which has the
universe for its object. This feeling, common to
ancient and modern Stoics, has an obvious justification
in man's dependence upon the natural world and in
its service to many sides of the mind. Such justifica-
tion of cosmic piety is rather obscured than supported
by the euphemisms and ambiguities in which these
philosophers usually indulge in their attempt to
preserve the customary religious unction. For the
more they personify the universe and give it the
name of God the more they turn it into a devil. The
universe, so far as we can observe it, is a wonderful
and immense engine ; its extent, its order, its beauty,
its cruelty, make it alike impressive. If we dramatize
its life and conceive its spirit, we are filled with wonder,
terror, and amusement, so magnificent is that spirit,
so prolific, inexorable, grammatical, and dull. Like
all animals and plants, the cosmos has its own way
of doing things, not wholly rational nor ideally best,
but patient, fatal, and fruitful. Great is this organism

1005



GEORGE SANTAYANA



of mud and fire, terrible this vast, painful, glorious
experiment. Why should we not look on the universe
with piety f Is it not our substance ? Are we made of
other clay ? All our possibilities lie from eternity
hidden in its bosom. It is the dispenser of all our joys.
We may address it without superstitious terrors ; it
is not wicked. It follows its own habits abstractedly ;
it can be trusted to be true to its word. Society is
not impossible between it and us, and since it is the
source of all our energies, the home of all our happiness,
shall we not cling to it and praise it, seeing that it
vegetates so grandly and so sadly, and that it is not
for us to blame it for what, doubtless, it never knew
that it did ? Where there is such infinite and laborious
potency there is room for every hope.

Little Essays



RUDYARD KIPLING

1865-

572 With the £Main Quard

' S~> UARRD, turn out ! '

Vj The Relief had come ; it was four o'clock.
' I'll catch a kyart for you, Sorr,' said Mulvaney.
diving hastily into his accoutrements. ' Come up
to the top av the Fort an' we'll pershue our invistiga-
tions into M'Grath's shtable.' The relieved guard
strolled round the main bastion on its way to the
swimming-bath. . .

' Fwhat 's here ? ' said Mulvaney, checking at
a blur of white by the foot of the old sentry-box.
He stooped and touched it. ' It 's Norah — Norah
M'Taggart ! Why, Nonie darlin', fwhat are ye doin'
out av your mother's bed at this time f '
1006



RUDYARD KIPLING



The two-year-old child of Sergeant M'Taggart
must have wandered for a breath of cool air to the
very verge of the parapet of the Fort ditch. Her
tiny night-shift was gathered into a wisp round her
neck and she moaned in her sleep. ' See there ! ' said
Mulvaney ; ' poor lamb ! Look at the heat-rash on
the innocint skin av her. 'Tis hard — crool hard even
for us. Fwhat must it be for these ? Wake up, Nonie,
your mother will be woild about you. Begad, the
child might ha' fallen into the ditch ! '

He picked her up in the growing light, and set her
on his shoulder, and her fair curls touched the grizzled
stubble of his temples. Ortheris and Learoyd followed
snapping their fingers, while Norah smiled at them
a sleepy smile. Then carolled Mulvaney, clear as
a lark, dancing the baby on his arm —

' If any young man should marry you,

.Say nothin' about the joke ,
That iver ye slep' in a sinthry-box,
Wrapped up in a soldier's cloak '

' Though, on my sowl, Nonie,' he said gravely,
' there was not much cloak about you. Niver mind,
you won't dhress like this ten years to come. Kiss
your friends an' run along to your mother.'

Nonie, set down close to the Married Quarters,
nodded with the quiet obedience of the soldier's
child, but, ere she pattered off over the flagged
path, held up her hps to be kissed by the Three
Musketeers. Orthens wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand and swore sentimentally ; Learoyd
turned pink ; and the two walked away together.
The Yorkshireman lifted up his voice and gave in
thunder the chorus of The Sentry-Box, while Ortheris
piped at his side.

1007



RUDYARD KIPLING



' 'Bin to a bloomin' sing-song, you two ? ' said the
Artilleryman, who was taking his cartridge down to
the Morning Gun. ' You're over merry for these
dashed days.'

' I bid ye take care o' the biat, said he,
For it comes of a noble race,'

Learoyd bellowed. The voices died out in the
swimming-bath.

' Oh, Terence ! ' I said, dropping into Mulvaney's
speech, when we were alone, ' it 's you that have the
Tongue ! '

He looked at me wearily ; his eyes were sunk in
his head, and his face was drawn and white. ' Eyah ! '
said he ; ' I've blandandhered thim through the night
somehow, but can thim that helps others help thim-
selves ? Answer me that, Sorr ! '

And over the bastions of Fort Amara broke the
pitiless day.

Soldiers Three

373 The Spring 'Running

IT was a perfect white night, as they call it. All
green things seemed to have made a month's
growth since the morning. The branch that was
yellow -leaved the day before dripped sap when
Mowgli broke it. The mosses curled deep and warm
over his feet, the young grass had no cutting edges,
and all the voices of the Jungle boomed like one deep
harpstring touched by the moon — the Moon of New
Talk, who splashed her light full on rock and pool,
slipped it between trunk and creeper, and sifted it
through a million leaves. Forgetting his unhappiness,
Mowgli sang aloud with pure delight as he settled into
1008



RUDYARD KIPLING

his stride. It was more like flying than anything else,
for he had chosen the long downward slope that leads
to the Northern Marshes through the heart of the
main Jungle, where the springy ground deadened the
fall of his feet. A man-taught man would have picked
his way with many stumbles through the cheating
moonlight, but Mowgli's muscles, trained by years
of experience, bore him up as though he were a feather.
When a rotten log or a hidden stone turned under
his foot he saved himself, never checking his pace,
without effort and without thought. When he tired
of ground-going he threw up his hands monkey-
fashion to the nearest creeper, and seemed to float
rather than to climb up into the thin branches, whence
he would follow a tree-road till his mood changed,
and he shot downward in a long, leafy curve to the
levels again. There were still, hot hollows surrounded
by wet rocks where he could hardly breathe for the
heavy scents of the night flowers and the bloom along
the creeper buds ; dark avenues where the moonlight
lay in belts as regular as checkered marbles in a church
aisle ; thickets where the wet young growth stood
breast-high about him and threw its arms round his
waist ; and hilltops crowned with broken rock, where
he leaped from stone to stone above the lairs of the
frightened little foxes. He would hear, very faint and
far off, the chug-drug of a boar sharpening his tusks
on a bole ; and would come across the great gray
brute all alone, scribing and rending the bark of a tall
tree, his mouth dripping with foam, and his eyes
blazing like fire. Or he would turn aside to the sound
of clashing horns and hissing grunts, and dash past
a couple of furious sambhur, staggering to and fro
with lowered heads, striped with blood that showed

1009



RUDYARD KIPLING



black in the moonlight. Or at some rushing ford he
would hear Jacala the Crocodile bellowing like a bull,
or disturb a twined knot of the Poison People, but
before they could strike he would be away and across
the glistening shingle, and deep in the Jungle again.

So he ran, sometimes shouting, sometimes singing
to himself, the happiest thing in all the Jungle that
night, till the smell of the flowers warned him that
he was near the marshes, and those lay far beyond his
farthest hunting-grounds.

The Second Jungle Book

574 The Qreat Wall

ROME'S Race— Rome's Pace ", as the proverb
says. Twenty-four miles in eight hours,
neither more nor less. Head and spear up, shield on
your back, cuirass-collar open one hand's breadth —
and that 's how you take the Eagles through Britain.'
' And did you meet any adventures ? ' said Dan.
' There are no adventures South the Wall,' said
Parnesius. ' The worst thing that happened me was
having to appear before a magistrate up North, where
a wandering philosopher had jeered at the Eagles.
I was able to show that the old man had deliberately
blocked our road ; and the magistrate told him, out
of his own Book, I believe, that, whatever his Gods
might be, he should pay proper respect to Caesar.'
' What did you do f ' said Dan.
' Went on. Why should / care for such things, my
business being to reach my station ? It took me
twenty days.

' Of course, the farther North you go the emptier
are the roads. At last you fetch clear of the forests

IOIO



RUDYARD KIPLING



and climb bare hills, where wolves howl in the ruins
of our cities that have been. No more pretty girls ;
no more jolly magistrates who knew your Father when
he was young, and invite you to stay with them ; no
news at the temples and way-stations except bad news
of wild beasts. There 's where you meet hunters, and
trappers for the Circuses, prodding along chained bears
and muzzled wolves. Your pony shies at them, and
your men laugh.

' The houses change from gardened villas to shut
forts with watch-towers of grey stone, and great stone-
walled sheepfolds, guarded by armed Britons of the
North Shore. In the naked hills beyond the naked
houses, where the shadows of the clouds play like
cavalry charging, you see puffs of black smoke from
the mines. The hard road goes on and on — and the
wind sings through your helmet-plume — past altars to
Legions and Generals forgotten, and broken statues of
Gods and Heroes, and thousands of graves where the
mountain foxes and hares peep at you. Red-hot in
summer, freezing in winter, is that big, purple heather
country of broken stone.

' Just when you think you are at the world's end,
you see a smoke from East to West as far as the eye
can turn, and then, under it, also as far as the eye can
stretch, houses and temples, shops and theatres, bar-
racks and granaries, trickling along like dice behind —
always behind — one long, low, rising and falling, and
hiding and showing line of towers. And that is the
Wall I '

' Ah 1 ' said the children, taking breath.

' You may well,' said Parnesius. ' Old men who have
followed the Eagles since boyhood say nothing in the
Empire is more wonderful than first sight of the Wall ! '

101 I



RUDYARD KIPLING



' Is it just a Wall ? Like the one round the kitchen-
garden ? ' said Dan.

' No, no ! It is the Wall. Along the top are towers
with guard-houses, small towers, between. Even on
the narrowest part of it three men with shields can
walk abreast, from guard-house to guard-house. A
little curtain wall, no higher than a man's neck, runs
along the top of the thick wall, so that from a distance
you see the helmets of the sentries sliding back and
forth like beads. Thirty feet high is the Wall, and on
the Picts' side, the North, is a ditch, strewn with
blades of old swords and spear-heads set in wood, and
tyres of wheels joined by chains. The Little People
come there to steal iron for their arrow-heads.

' But the Wall itself is not more wonderful than the
town behind it. Long ago there were great ramparts
and ditches on the South side, and no one was allowed
to build there. Now the ramparts are partly pulled
down and built over, from end to end of the Wall ;
making a thin town eighty miles long. Think of it !
One roaring, rioting, cock-fighting, wolf-baiting, horse-
racing town, from Ituna on the West to Segedunum
on the cold eastern beach ! On one side heather,
woods and ruins where Picts hide, and on the other,
a vast town — long like a snake, and wicked like a snake.
Yes, a snake basking beside a warm wall !

' My Cohort, I was told, lay at Hunno, where the
Great North Road runs through the Wall into the
Province of Valentia.' Parnesius laughed scornfully.
' The Province of Valentia ! We followed the road,
therefore, into Hunno town, and stood astonished.
The place was a fair — a fair of peoples from every
corner of the Empire. Some were racing horses :
some sat in wine-shops : some watched dogs baiting

IOI2



RUDYARD KIPLING

bears, and many gathered in a ditch to see cocks fight.
A boy not much older than myself, but I could see
he was an officer, reined up before me and asked what
I wanted.

' " My station," I said, and showed him my shield.'
Parnesius held up his broad shield with its three X's
like letters on a beer-cask.

' " Lucky omen ! " said he. " Your Cohort 's the
next tower to us, but they're all at the cock-fight.
This is a happy place. Come and wet the Eagles."
He meant to offer me a drink.

' " When I've handed over my men," I said. I felt
angry and ashamed.

' " Oh, you'll soon outgrow that sort of nonsense,"
he answered. " But don't let me interfere with your
hopes. Go on to the Statue of Roma Dea. You can't
miss it. The main road into Valentia ! " and he
laughed and rode off. I could see the statue not
a quarter of a mile away, and there I went. At some
time or other the Great North Road ran under it into
Valentia ; but the far end had been blocked up because
of the Picts, and on the plaster a man had scratched,
" Finish ! " It was like marching into a cave. We
grounded spears together, my little thirty, and it
echoed in the barrel of the arch, but none came.
There was a door at one side painted with our number.
We prowled in, and I found a cook asleep, and ordered
him to give us food. Then I climbed to the top of
the Wall, and looked out over the Pict country, and
I — thought,' said Parnesius. ' The bncked-up arch
with " Finish ! " on the plaster was what shook me,
for I was not much more than a boy.'

Puck of Pook's Hill



1013



HERBERT GEORGE WELLS

1866-

575 The Totwell Inn

IT was about two o'clock in the afternoon, one hot
day in May, when Mr. Polly, unhurrying and
serene, came upon that broad bend of the river to
which the little lawn and garden of the Potwell Inn
run down. He stopped at the sight of the place and
surveyed its deep tiled roof, nestling under big trees —
you never get a decently big, decently shaped tree by
the seaside — its sign towards the roadway, its sun-
blistered green bench and tables, its shapely white
windows and its row of upshooting hollyhock plants
in the garden. A hedge separated the premises from
a buttercup-yellow meadow, and beyond stood three
poplars in a group against the sky, three exceptionally
tall, graceful, and harmonious poplars. It is hard to
say what there was about them that made them so
beautiful to Mr. Polly, but they seemed to him to
touch a pleasant scene with a distinction almost divine.
He stood admiring them quietly for a long time.

At last the need for coarser aesthetic satisfactions
arose in him.

' Provinder,' he whispered, drawing near to the inn.
' Cold sirloin, for choice. And nutbrown brew and
wheaten bread.'

The nearer he came to the place the more he liked
it. The windows on the ground floor were long and
low, and they had pleasing red blinds. The green
tables outside were agreeably ringed with memories
of former drinks, and an extensive grape vine spread
level branches across the whole front of the place.
Against the wall was a broken oar, two boat-hooks, and
10114



HERBERT GEORGE WELLS



the stained and faded red cushions of a pleasure-boat.
One went up three steps to the glass-panelled door and
peeped into a broad, low room with a bar and a beer-
engine, behind which were many bright and helpful-
looking bottles against mirrors, and great and little
pewter measures, and bottles fastened in brass wire
upside down, with their corks replaced by taps, and
a white china cask labelled ' Shrub ', and cigar boxes,
and boxes of cigarettes, and a couple of Toby jugs
and a beautifully coloured hunting scene framed and
glazed, showing the most elegant people taking Piper's
Cherry Brandy, and cards such as the law requires
about the dilution of spirits and the illegality of
bringing children into bars, and satirical verses about
swearing and asking for credit, and three very bright,
red-cheeked wax apples, and a round-shaped clock.

But these were the mere background to the really
pleasant thing in the spectacle, which was quite the
plumpest woman Mr. Polly had ever seen, seated in
an arm-chair in the midst of all these bottles and
glasses and glittering things, peacefully and tranquilly,
and without the slightest loss of dignity, asleep. Many
people would have called her a fat woman, but
Mr. Polly's innate sense of epithet told him from the
outset that plump was the word. She had shapely
brows and a straight, well-shaped nose, kind lines and
contentment about her mouth, and beneath it the
jolly chins clustered like chubby little cherubim about
the feet of an Assumption-ing Madonna. Her plump-
ness was firm and pink and wholesome, and her hands,
dimpled at every joint, were clasped in front of her ;
she seemed, as it were, to embrace herself with infinite
confidence and kindliness, as one who knew herself
good in substance, good in essence, and would show



1015



HERBERT GEORGE WELLS



her gratitude to God by that ready acceptance of all
that He had given her. Her head was a little on one
side, not much, but just enough to speak of trustful-
ness, and rob her of the stiff effect of self-reliance.
And she slept.

' My sort,' said Mr. Polly, and opened the door very
softly, divided between the desire to enter and come
nearer, and an instinctive indisposition to break
slumbers so manifestly sweet and satisfying.

She awoke with a start, and it amazed Mr. Polly to
see swift terror flash into her eyes. Instantly it had
gone again.

' Law ! ' she said, her face softening with relief.
' I thought you was Jim.'

' I'm never Jim,' said Mr. Polly.

' You've got his sort of hat.'

' Ah ! ' said Mr. Polly, and leant over the bar.

' It just came into my head you was Jim,' said
the plump lady, dismissed the topic and stood up.
' I believe I was having forty winks,' she said, ' if all
the truth was told. What can I do for you ? '

' Cold meat ? ' said Mr. Polly.

' There is cold meat,' the plump woman admitted.

' And room for it.'

The plump woman came and leant over the bar
and regarded him judicially but kindly. ' There 's
some cold boiled beef,' she said, and added, ' A bit
of crisp lettuce ? '

' New mustard,' said Mr. Polly.

' And a tankard ! '

' A tankard.'

They understood each other perfectly.
' Looking for work ? ' asked the plump woman.
' In a way,' said Mr. Polly.
1016



HERBERT GEORGE WELLS



They smiled like old friends.

Whatever the truth may be about love, there is
certainly such a thing as friendship at first sight.
They liked each other's voices, they liked each other's
way of smiling and speaking.

' It 's such beautiful weather this spring,' said Mr.
Polly, explaining everything.

' What sort of work do you want ? ' she asked.

' I've never properly thought that out,' said Mr.
Polly, ' I've been looking round — for ideas.'

' Will you have your beef in the tap or outside ?
That 's the tap.'

Mr. Polly had a glimpse of an oaken settle. ' In
the tap will be handier for you,' he said.

' Hear that ? ' said the plump lady.

' Hear what f '

' Listen.'

Presently the silence was broken by a distant howl —
' Oooooover ! ' ' Eh f ' she said.
He nodded.

' That 's the ferry. And there isn't a ferryman.'

' Could I ? '

' Can you punt ? '

' Never tried.'

' Well — pull the pole out before you reach the end
of the punt, that 's all. Try.'

Mr. Polly went out again into the sunshine.

At times one can tell so much so briefly. Here are
the facts then — bare. He found a punt and a pole,
got across to the steps on the opposite side, picked up
an elderly gentleman in an alpaca jacket and a pith
helmet, cruised with him vaguely for twenty minutes,
conveyed him tortuously into the midst of a thicket
of forget-me-not spangled sedges, splashed some water-

1017



HERBERT GEORGE WELLS



weed over him, hit him twice with the punt pole, and
finally landed him, alarmed but abusive, in treacherous
soil at the edge of a hay meadow about forty yards
down-stream, where he immediately got into difficulties
with a noisy, aggressive little white dog, which was
guarding a jacket.

Mr. Polly returned in a complicated manner, but
with perfect dignity, to his moorings.

He found the plump woman rather flushed and
tearful, and seated at one of the green tables outside.

' I been laughing at you,' she said.

' What for ? ' asked Mr. Polly.

' I ain't 'ad such a laugh since Jim come 'ome.
When you 'it 'is 'ead, it 'urt my side.'

' It didn't hurt his head — not particularly.'

' Did you charge him anything ? '

' Gratis,' said Mr. Polly. ' I never thought of it.'

The plump woman pressed her hands to her sides
and laughed silently for a space. ' You ought to 'ave
charged 'im Sumpthing,' she said. ' You better come
and have your cold meat before you do any more
puntin'. You and me'll get on together.'

The History of Mr. Polly

LIONEL JOHNSON

1867-1902

576 ■^Mannerism in sArt

THE works of a writer past the prime of life are
apt to display a certain excess or extravagance :
what was once his strength has now become his weak-
ness, and his virtue has changed into his vice. This is
most often seen in the case of very strong and masterful
writers ; those whose good work is all done in some
1018



LIONEL JOHNSON



one annus mirabihs, or flowering season, fall into mere
decay, as Coleridge or as Wordsworth. It is in
writers whose whole life has been full of successful
toil and untiling effort, that manner degenerates into
mannerism. Such writers, and, indeed, all artists
of such a kind, are often men who have discovered
some new way in art, and who possess a secret and a
power proper to themselves ; the world, used to the
old and familiar ways, will not at once take notice
of them. In proportion to their faith in themselves
and their fidelity to their art, these artists, unshaken
and undeterred, continue upon their way, rather
increasing than relaxing their unappreciated labours.
Slowly and gradually the world comes round to their
side, is converted to their faith, welcomes them with
applause. But what of the artists, all this long time ?
Is there no danger that, in a kind of unconscious
defiance and challenge, they will have gone too far,
and grown enamoured of that in their work which the
world did well to blame? If the world cried out
upon their obscurity, where there was some obscurity
but not much, was it not natural in them to have
replied with worse obscurities, out of an impatient
contempt and exasperation ?

Reviews and Critical Papers

ARNOLD BENNETT

1867-

577 Swinburne

ON Good Friday night I was out in the High
Street, at the cross-roads, where the warp and
the woof of the traffic assault each other under a great
glare of lamps. The shops were closed and black,

1019



ARNOLD BENNETT



except where a tobacconist kept the tobacconist's
bright and everlasting vigil ; but above the shops
occasional rare windows were illuminated, giving hints
— dressing-tables, pictures, gas-globes — of intimate
private lives. I don't know why such hints should
always seem to me pathetic, saddening ; but they do.
And beneath them, through the dark defile of shutters,
motor-omnibuses roared and swayed and curved, too
big for the street, and dwarfing it. And automobiles
threaded between them, and bicycles dared the spaces
that were left. From afar off there came a flying light,
like a shot out of a gun, and it grew into a man perched
on a shuddering contrivance that might have been
invented by H. G. Wells, and swept perilously into
the contending currents, and by miracles emerged
untouched, and was gone, driven by the desire of the
immortal soul within the man. This strange thing
happened again and again. The pavements were
crowded with hurrying or loitering souls, and the
omnibuses and autos were full of them : hundreds
passed before the vision every moment. And they
were all preoccupied ; they nearly all bore the weary,
egotistic melancholy that spreads like an infection at
the close of a fete day in London ; the lights of
a motor-omnibus would show the rapt faces of sixteen
souls at once in their glass cage, driving the vehicle
on by their desires. The policeman and the loafers
in the ring of fire made by the public-houses at the
cross-roads — even these were grave with the universal
affliction of life, and grim with the relentless universal
egotism. Lovers walked as though there were no
heaven and no earth, but only themselves in space.
Nobody but me seemed to guess that the road to Delhi
could be as naught to this road, with its dark, fleeing

1020



ARNOLD BENNETT



shapes, its shifting beams, its black brick precipices,
and its thousand pale, flitting faces of a gloomy and
decadent race. As says the Indian proverb, I met ten
thousand men on the Putney High Street, and they
were all my brothers. But I alone was aware of it.
As I stood watching autobus after autobus swing
round in a fearful semicircle to begin a new journey,
I gazed myself into a mystic comprehension of the
significance of what I saw. A few yards beyond where
the autobuses turned was a certain house with lighted
upper windows, and in that house the greatest lyric
versifier that England ever had, and one of the great
poets of the whole world and of all the ages, was dying :
a name immortal. But nobody looked ; nobody
seemed to care ; I doubt if any one thought of it.
This enormous negligence appeared to me to be fine,
to be magnificently human.

The next day all the shops were open, and hundreds
of fatigued assistants were pouring out their exhaustless
patience on thousands of urgent and bright women ;
and flags waved on high, and the gutters were banked
with yellow and white flowers, and the air was brisk
and the roadways were clean. The very vital spirit
of energy seemed to have scattered the breath of life
generously, so that all were intoxicated by it in the
gay sunshine. He was dead then. The waving
posters said it. . .

Last year I was walking down Putney Hill, and I
saw Swinburne for the first and last time. I could see
nothing but his face and head. I did not notice those
ridiculously short trousers that Putney people invari-
ably mention when mentioning Swinburne. Never
have I seen a man's life more clearly written in his

1021



ARNOLD BENNETT



eyes and mouth and forehead. The face of a man who
had lived with fine, austere, passionate thoughts of
his own ! By the heavens, it was a noble sight. I have
not seen a nobler. Now, I knew by hearsay every
crease in his trousers, but nobody had told me that his
face was a vision that would never fade from my
memory.

Books and Persons



CHARLES EDWARD MONTAGUE

1867-

578 The Faculty of Delight

AMONG the mind's powers is one that comes of
t itself to many children and artists. It need not
be lost, to the end of his days, by any one who has
ever had it. This is the power of taking delight in
a thing, or rather in anything, everything, not as
a means to some other end, but just because it is what
it is, as the lover dotes on whatever may be the traits
of the beloved object. A child in the full health of
his mind will put his hand flat on the summer turf,
feel it, and give a little shiver of private glee at the
elastic firmness of the globe. He is not thinking how
well it will do for some game or to feed sheep upon.
That would be the way of the wooer whose mind runs
on his mistress's money. The child's is sheer affection,
the true ecstatic sense of the thing's inherent charac-
teristics. No matter what the things may be, no
matter what they are good or no good for, there they
are, each with a thrilling unique look and feel of its
own, like a face ; the iron astringently cool under its
paint, the painted wood familiarly warmer, the clod
1022



CHARLES EDWARD MONTAGUE



crumbling enchantingly down in the hands, with its
little dry smell of the sun and of hot nettles ; each
common thing a personality marked by delicious
differences.

The joy of an Adam new to the garden and just
looking round is brought by the normal child to the
things that he does as well as those that he sees.
To be suffered to do some plain work with the real
spade used by mankind can give him a mystical exalta-
tion : to come home with his legs, as the French say,
re-entering his body from the fatigue of helping the
gardener to weed beds sends him to sleep in the glow
of a beatitude that is an end in itself. . .

The right education, if we could find it, would
work up this creative faculty of delight into all its
branching possibilities of knowledge, wisdom, and
nobility. Of all three it is the beginning, condition, or
raw material.

Disenchantment

5J9 ^Belated Victory

THERE were other days, during the following
months of worm-eaten success, when some mirage
of the greater joys which we had forfeited hung for
a few moments over the sand. It must be always
a strange delight to an infantryman to explore at his
ease, in security, ground that to him has been almost
as unimaginable as events after death. There is no
describing the vesture of enigmatic remoteness enfold-
ing a long-watched enemy line. Tolstoy has tried, but
even he does not come up to it. Vergil alone has
expressed one sensation of the British overflow over
Lille and Cambrai, Menin (even the Menin Road had

1023



CHARLES EDWARD MONTAGUE



an end) and Bruges and Ostend, Le Cateau and
Landrecies, Liege and Namur —

Iuvat ire et Donca castra
Desertosque videre locos, htusque rehctum.
Classibus hie locus, hie acie certare solebant,
Hie Dolopum manus, hie saevus tendebat Achilles.

And then, wherever you went, till the frontier was
reached, every one was your host and your friend ; all
the relations of strangers to one another had been
transfigured into the sum of all kindness and courtesy.
In one mining village in Flanders, quitted that day
by the Germans, a woman rushed out of a house to
give me a lump of bread, thinking that we must all
be as hungry as she and her neighbours. Late one
night in Brussels, just after the Germans had gone,
I was walking with another officer down the chief
street of the city, then densely crowded with radiant
citizens. My friend had a wooden stump leg and could
not walk very well ; and this figure of a khaki-clad
man, maimed in the discharge of an Allied obligation to
Belgium, seemed suddenly and almost simultaneously
to be seen by the whole of that great crowd in all its
symbolic value, so that the crowd fell silent and opened
out spontaneously along the whole length of the street
and my friend had to hobble down the middle of
a long avenue of bareheaded men and bowing women.

Finally — last happy thrill of the war — the first stroke
of eleven o'clock, on the morning of Armistice Day,
on the town clock of Mons, only captured that
morning ; Belgian civilians and British soldiers crowd-
ing together into the square, shaking each other's hands
and singing each other's national anthems ; a little
toy-like peal of bells in the church contriving to tinkle
out ' Tipperary ' for our welcome, while our airmen,
1024



CHARLES EDWARD MONTAGUE



released from their labours, tumbled and romped over-
head like boys turning cartwheels with ecstasy.

What a victory it might have been — the real, the
Winged Victory, chivalric, whole and unstained ! The
bride that our feckless wooing had sought and not won
in the generous youth of the war had come to us now :
an old woman, or dead, she no longer refused us. We
had arrived, like the prince in the poem —

Too late for love, too late for joy,

Too late, too late !
You loitered on the road too long,

You trifled at the gate .
The enchanted dove upon her branch

Died without a mate ;
The enchanted pnncess in her tower

Slept, died behind the grate .
Her heart was starving all this while

You made it wait.

Disenchantment



JOHN GALSWORTHY

1867-

580 "Death of zAunt <tAnn

UPON arriving, the coffin was borne into the
chapel, and, two by two, the mourners filed in
behind it. This guard of men, all attached to the dead
by the bond of kinship, was an impressive and singular
sight in the great city of London, with its over-
whelming diversity of life, its innumerable vocations,
pleasures, duties, its terrible hardness, its terrible call
to individualism.

The family had gathered to triumph over all this,
to give a show of tenacious unity, to illustrate gloriously
that law of property underlying the growth of their
tree, by which it had thriven and spread, trunk and
2830 l 1 1025



JOHN GALSWORTHY



branches, the sap flowing through all, the full growth
reached at the appointed time. The spirit of the old
woman lying in her last sleep had called them to this
demonstration. It was her final appeal to that unity
which had been their strength — it was her final
triumph that she had died while the tree was yet whole.

She was spared the watching of the branches jut
out beyond the point of balance. She could not look
into the hearts of her followers. The same law that
had worked in her, bringing her up from a tall, straight-
backed slip of a girl to a woman strong and grown,
from a woman grown to a woman old, angular, feeble,
almost witch-like, with individuality all sharpened and
sharpened, as all rounding from the world's contact
fell off from her — that same law would work, was
working, in the family she had watched like a mother.

She had seen it young, and growing, she had seen
it strong and grown, and before her old eyes had time
or strength to see any more, she died. She would have
tried, and who knows but she might have kept it young
and strong, with her old fingers, her trembling kisses —
a little longer ; alas ! not even Aunt Ann could
fight with Nature.

' Pride comes before a fall ! ' In accordance with
this, the greatest of Nature's ironies, the Forsyte
family had gathered for a last proud pageant before
they fell. Their faces to right and left, in single lines,
were turned for the most part impassively toward the
ground, guardians of their thoughts ; but here and
there, one looking upward, with a line between his
brows, seemed to see some sight on the chapel walls too
much for him, to be listening to something that
appalled. And the responses, low-muttered, in voices
through which rose the same tone, the same unseizablc
1026



JOHN GALSWORTHY

family ring, sounded weird, as though murmured in
hurried duplication by a single person.

The service in the chapel over, the mourners filed
up again to guard the body to the tomb. The vault
stood open, and, round it, men in black were waiting.

From that high and sacred field, where thousands
of the upper-middle class lay in their last sleep, the
eyes of the Forsytes travelled down across the flocks
of graves. There — spreading to the distance, lay
London, with no sun over it, mourning the loss of
its daughter, mourning with this family, so dear, the
loss of her who was mother and guardian. A hundred
thousand spires and houses, blurred in the great gray
web of property, lay there like prostrate worshippers
before the grave of this, the oldest Forsyte of them all.

A few words, a sprinkle of earth, the thrusting of the
coffin home, and Aunt Ann had passed to her last rest.

Round the vault, trustees of that passing, the five
brothers stood, with white heads bowed ; they would
see that Ann was comfortable where she was going.
Her little property must stay behind, but otherwise,
all that could be should be done.

Then severally, each stood aside, and putting on his
hat, turned back to inspect the new inscription on the
marble of the family vault :

SACRED TO THE MEMORY OF

ANN FORSYTE,

THE DAUGHTER OF THE ABOVE
JOLYON AND ANN FORSYTE,
WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE THE 27TH DAY OF
SEPTEMBER, l886,
AGED EIGHTY-SEVEN YEARS AND FOUR DAYS.

The Forsyte Saga
1027



ARTHUR CLUTTON-BROCK

1868-1924

581 T/ie C ar <tinal Virtue of 'Prose

PROSE of it3 very nature is longer than verse, and
the virtues peculiar to it manifest themselves
gradually. If the cardinal virtue of poetry is love, the
cardinal virtue of prose is justice ; and, whereas love
makes you act and speak on the spur of the moment,
justice needs inquiry, patience, and a control even of
the noblest passions. . . By justice here I do not mean
justice only to particular people or ideas, but a habit
of justice in all the processes of thought, a style
tranquillized and a form moulded by that habit. The
master of prose is not cold, but he will not let any
word or image inflame him with a heat irrelevant to
his purpose. Unhasting, unresting, he pursues it,
subduing all the riches of his mind to it, rejecting all
beauties that are not germane to it ; making his own
beauty out of the very accomplishment of it, out of
the whole work and its proportions, so that you must
read to the end before you know that it is beautiful.
But he has his reward, for he is trusted and convinces,
as those who are at the mercy of their own eloquence
do not ; and he gives a pleasure all the greater for
being hardly noticed. In the best prose, whether
narrative or argument, we are so led on as we read,
that we do not stop to applaud the writer, nor do we
stop to question him.

Modern Essays



1028



EDWARD VERRALL LUCAS

1868-

582 The Windmill

CHANCE recently made me for a while the tenant
of a windmill. Not to live in, and unhappily not
to grind corn in, but to visit as the mood arose, and
see the ships in the harbour from the topmost window,
and look down on the sheep and the green world all
around. For this mill stands high and white — so white,
indeed, that when there is a thunder-cloud behind it,
it seems a thing of polished aluminium.

From its windows you can see four other mills,
all, like itself, idle, and one merely a ruin and one with
only two sweeps left. But just over the next range of
hills, out of sight, to the north-east, is a windmill that
still merrily goes, and about five miles away to the
north-west is another also active ; so that things are
not quite so bad hereabouts as in many parts of the
country, where the good breezes blow altogether in
vain. . .

Thinking over the losses which England has had
forced upon her by steam and the ingenuity of the
engineer, one is disposed to count the decay of the
windmill among the first. Perhaps in the matter of
pure picturesqueness the most serious thing that ever
happened to England was the discovery of galvanized
iron roofing ; but, after all, there was never anything
but quiet and rich and comfortable beauty about red
roofs, whereas the living windmill is not only beautiful
but romantic too : a willing, man-serving creature,
yoked to the elements, a whirling monster, often a
thing of terror. No one can stand very near the
crashing sweeps of a windmill in half a gale without a

1029



EDWARD VERRALL LUCAS

tightening of the heart — a feeling comparable to that
which comes from watching the waves break over a
wall in a storm. And to be within the mill at such
a time is to know something of sound's very sources ;
it is the cave of noise itself. No doubt there are
dens of hammering energy which are more shattering,
but the noise of a windmill is largely natural, the pro-
duct of wood striving with the good sou'-wester ; it
fills the ears rather than assaults them. The effect,
moreover, is by no means lessened by the absence of
the wind itself and the silent nonchalance of the
miller and his man, who move about in the midst
of this appalling racket with the quiet efficiency of
vergers.

In my mill, of course, there is no such uproar ;
nothing but the occasional shaking of the cross-pieces
of the idle sails. Everything is still ; and the pity
of it is that everything is in almost perfect order for
the day's work. The mill one day — some score years
ago — was full of life ; the next, and ever after, mute
and lifeless, like a stream frozen in a night or the
palace in Tennyson's ballad of the ' Sleeping Beauty '.
There is no decay — merely inanition. One or two
of the apple-wood cogs have been broken from the
great wheel ; a few floor planks have been rotted ;
but that is all. A week's overhauling would put
everything right. But it will never come, and the
cheerful winds that once were to drive a thousand
English mills so happily now bustle over the Channel
in vain.

Old Lamps for New



1030



ROBERT FALCON SCOTT

AND 1868-1912



CHARLES TURLEY
583 (;') The Death of Captain Oates

ON this same day a blizzard met them after they had
marched for half an hour, and Scott seeing that
not one of them could face such weather, pitched camp
and stayed there until the following morning. Then
they struggled on again with the sky so overcast that
they could see nothing and consequently lost the tracks.
At the most they gained little more than six miles during
the day, and this they knew was as much as they could
hope to do if they got no help from wind or surfaces.
' We have 7 days' food and should be about 55 miles
from One Ton Camp to-night, 6 x 7 = 42, leaving us 13
miles short of our distance, even if things get no worse.'

Oates too was, Scott felt, getting very near the end.
' What we or he will do, God only knows. We dis-
cussed the matter after breakfast ; he is a brave fine
fellow and understands the situation, but he practically
asked for advice. Nothing could be said but to urge him
to march as long as he could. One satisfactory result to
the discussion : I practically ordered Wilson to hand
over the means of ending our troubles to us, so that any
of us may know how to do so. Wilson had no choice
between doing so and our ransacking the medicine case.'

Thus Scott wrote on the nth, and the next days
brought more and more misfortunes with them. A
strong northerly wind stopped them altogether on the
13 th, and although on the following morning they
started with a favourable breeze, it soon shifted and
blew through their wind-clothes and their mits.
' Poor Wilson horribly cold, could not get off ski for

103 1



ROBERT FALCON SCOTT



some time. Bowers and I practically made camp, and
when we got into the tent at last we were all deadly
cold. . . We must go on, but now the making of every
camp must be more difficult and dangerous. It must
be near the end, but a pretty merciful end. . . I
shudder to think what it will be like to-morrow.'

Up to this time, incredible as it seems, Scott had only
once spared himself the agony of writing in his journal,
so nothing could be more pathetic and significant than
the fact that at last he was unable any longer to keep
a daily record of this magnificent journey.

' Friday, March 16 or Saturday 17. Lost track of
dates, but think the last correct,' his next entry begins,
but then under the most unendurable conditions he
went on to pay a last and imperishable tribute to his
dead companion.

' Tragedy all along the line. At lunch, the day
before yesterday, poor Titus Oates said he couldn't
go on ; he proposed we should leave him in his sleeping-
bag. That we could not do, and we induced him to
come on, on the afternoon march. In spite of its awful
nature for him he struggled on and we made a few miles.
At night he was worse and we knew the end had come.

' Should this be found I want these facts recorded.
Oates' last thoughts were of his Mother, but immedi-
ately before he took pride in thinking that his regiment
would be pleased with the bold way in which he met
his death. We can testify to his bravery. He has
borne intense suffering for weeks without complaint,
and to the very last was able and willing to discuss out-
side subjects. He did not — would not — give up hope
till the very end. He was a brave soul. This was the
end. He slept through the night before last, hoping
not to wake ; but he woke in the morning — yesterday.



1032



ROBERT FALCON SCOTT



It was blowing a blizzard. He said, " I am just going
outside and may be some time." He went out into the
blizzard and we have not seen him since.

' I take this opportunity of saying that we have
stuck to our sick companions to the last. In case of
Edgar Evans, when absolutely out of food and he lay
insensible, the safety of the remainder seemed to demand
his abandonment, but Providence mercifully removed
him at this critical moment. He died a natural death,
and we did not leave him till two hours after his death.

' We knew that poor Oates was walking to his death,
but though we tried to dissuade him, we knew it was
the act of a brave man and an English gentleman. We
all hope to meet the end with a similar spirit, and
assuredly the end is not far.'

(it) The End

'March 29. — Since the 21st we have had a con-
tinuous gale from W.S.W. and SW. We had fuel to
make two cups of tea apiece, and bare food for two
days on the 20th. Every day we have been ready to
start for our depot 1 1 miles away, but outside the door
of the tent it remains a scene of whirling drift. I do not
think we can hope for any better things now. We
shall stick it out to the end, but we are getting weaker,
of course, and the end cannot be far.

' It seems a pity, but I do not think I can write more.

' R. Scott '

Last entry.

' For God's sake look after our people.'

After Cherry-Garrard and Demetri had returned to
Hut Point on March 16 without having seen any signs
of the Polar party, Atkinson and Keohane made one
more desperate effort to find them. When, however,

">33



ROBERT FALCON SCOTT



this had been unsuccessful there was nothing more to
be done until the winter was over.

During this long and anxious time the leadership
of the party devolved upon Atkinson, who under the
most trying circumstances showed qualities that are
beyond all praise. At the earliest possible moment
(October 30) a large party started south. ' On the
night of the nth and morning of the 12th,' Atkinson
says, ' after we had marched 1 1 miles due south of One
Ton, we found the tent. It was an object partially
snowed up and looking like a cairn. Before it were the
ski sticks and in front of them a bamboo which pro-
bably was the mast of the sledge. . .

' Inside the tent were the bodies of Captain Scott,
Doctor Wilson, and Lieutenant Bowers. They had
pitched their tent well, and it had withstood all the
blizzards of an exceptionally hard winter.'

Wilson and Bowers were found in the attitude of
sleep, their sleeping-bags closed over their heads as they
would naturally close them.

Scott died later. He had thrown back the flaps of his
sleeping-bag, and opened his coat. The little wallet
containing the three note-books was under his shoulder
and his arm flung across Wilson.

Scott's Last Expedition, retold by Charles Turley

MICHAEL FAIRLESS

(MARGARET FAIRLESS BARBER, 1869-1901)

584 The c Roadmender and the 'Birds

THE birds have no fear of me ; am I not also of
the brown brethren in my sober fustian livery?
They share my meals — at least the little dun-coated
i°34



MICHAEL F AIRLESS



Franciscans do ; the blackbirds and thrushes care not
a whit for such simple food as crumbs, but with legs
well apart and claws tense with purchase they disinter
poor brother worm, having first mocked him with
sound of rain. The robin that lives by the gate regards
my heap of stones as subject to his special inspection.
He sits atop and practises the trill of his summer song
until it shrills above and through the metallic clang of
my strokes ; and when I pause he cocks his tail, with
a humorous twinkle of his round eye which means —
' What ! shirking, big brother ? ' — and I fall, ashamed,
to my mending of roads.

The Roadmender

HILAIRE BELLOC

1870-

5S5 The S^ormans

THEY have been written of enough to-day, but
who has seen them from close by or understood
that brilliant interlude of power f

The little bullet-headed men, vivacious, and splen-
didly brave, we know that they awoke all Europe, that
they first provided settled financial systems and settled
governments of land, and that everywhere, from the
Grampians to Mesopotamia, they were like steel when
all other Christians were like wood or like lead.

We know that they were a flash. They were not
formed or definable at all before the year 1000; by
the year 1200 they were gone. Some odd transitory
phenomenon of cross-breeding, a very lucky freak in
the history of the European family, produced the only
body of men who all were lords and who in their col-
lective action showed continually nothing but genius.



HILAIRE BELLOC



We know that they were the spear-head, as it were,
of the Gallic spirit : the vanguard of that one of the
Gallic expansions which we associate with the opening
of the Middle Ages and with the crusades. . , We know
all this and write about it ; nevertheless, we do not
make enough of the Normans in England.

Here and there a man who really knows his subject
and who disdains the market of the school books, puts
as it should be put their conquest of this island and
their bringing into our blood whatever is still strongest
in it. Many (descended from their leaders) have
remarked their magical ride through South Italy,
their ordering of Sicily, their hand in Palestine. As
for the Normans in Normandy, of their exchequer
there, of what Rouen was — all that has never been
properly written down at all. Their great adventure
here in England has been most written of by far ; but
I say again no one has made enough of them ; no
one has brought them back out of their graves. The
character of what they did has been lost in these silly
little modern quarrels about races, which are but the
unscholarly expression of a deeper hypocritical quarrel
about religion.

Yet it is in England that the Norman can be studied
as he can be studied nowhere else. He did not write
here (as in Sicily) upon a palimpsest. He was not
merged here (as in the Orient) with the rest of the
French. He was segregated here ; he can be studied
in isolation ; for though so many that crossed the sea
on that September night with William, the big leader
of them, held no Norman tenure, yet the spirit of
the whole thing was Norman : the regularity, the
suddenness, the achievement, and, when the short
fighting was over, the creation of a new society. It
1036



HILAIRE BELLOC



was the Norman who began everything over again—
the first fresh influence since Rome.

The riot of building has not been seized. The
island was conquered in 1070. It was a place of heavy
foolish men with random laws, pale eyes, and a slow
manner ; their houses were of wood : sometimes they
built (but how painfully, and how childishly !) with
stone. There was no height, there was no dignity,
there was no sense of permanence. The Norman
Government was established. At once rapidity, energy,
the clear object of a united and organised power
followed. And see what followed in architecture
alone, and in what a little space of the earth, and in
what a little stretch of time — less than the time that
separates us to-day from the year of Disraeli's death
or the occupation of Egypt.

The Conquest was achieved in 1 070. In that same
year they pulled down the wooden shed at Bury St.
Edmunds, ' unworthy,' they said, ' of a great saint,'
and began the great shrine of stone. Next year it
was the castle at Oxford, in 1075 Monkswearmouth,
Jarrow, and the church at Chester ; in 1077 Rochester
and St Alban's ; in 1079 Winchester. Ely, Worcester,
Thorney, Hurley, Lincoln, followed with the next
years ; by 1089 they had tackled Gloucester, by 1092
Carlisle, by 1093 Lindisfarne, Christchurch, tall Dur-
ham. . . And this is but a short and random list of
some of their greatest works in the space of one boy-
hood. Hundreds of castles, houses, village churches
are unrecorded.

Were they not indeed a people? . .

One may say of the Norman preceding the Gothic
what Dante said of Virgil preceding the Faith : Would
that they had been born in a time when they could

1037



HILAIRE BELLOC



have known it ! But the East was not yet open. The
mind of Europe had not yet received the great experi-
ence of the Crusades ; the Normans had no medium
wherein to express their mighty soul, save the round
arch and the straight line, the capital barbaric or naked,
the sullen round shaft of the pillar — more like a drum
than like a column. They could build, as it were,
with nothing but the last ruins of Rome. They were
given no forms but the forms which the fatigue and
lethargy of the Dark Ages had repeated for six hundred
years. They were capable, even in the north, of im-
pressing even these forms with a superhuman majesty.

Htlls and the Sea

JOHN MILLINGTON SYNGE

1871-1909

586 'Riders to the Sea

AURTA has gone over and knelt down at the
head of the table. The women are keening softly
and swaying themselves with a slow movement. Cath-
leen and Nora kneel at the other end of the table. The
men kneel near the door.

Maurya praising her head and speaking as if she did
not see the people around her). They're all gone now,
and there isn't anything more the sea can do to me. . .
I'll have no call now to be up crying and praying when
the wind breaks from the south, and you can hear the
surf is in the east, and the surf is in the west, making
a great stir with the two noises, and they hitting one
on the other. I'll have no call now to be going down
and getting Holy Water in the dark nights after
Samhain, and I won't care what way the sea is when
the other women will be keening. (To Nora.) Give
1038




JOHN MILLINGTON SYNGE



me the Holy Water, Nora ; there 's a small sup still
on the dresser.

Nora gives it to her.
Maurya {drops Michael's clothes across Bartley's
feet, and sprinkles the Holy Water over him). It isn't
that I haven't prayed for you, Bartley, to the Almighty
God. It isn't that I haven't said prayers in the dark
night till you wouldn't know what I'd be saying ; but
it 's a great rest I'll have now, and it 's time, surely.
It 's a great rest I'll have now, and great sleeping in
the long nights after Samhain, if it 's only a bit of wet
flour we do have to eat, and maybe a fish that would be
stinking.

Riders to the Sea

MAX BEERBOHM

1872-

557 The ^Morris Dancers

IT was in the wide street of a tiny village near Oxford
that I saw them. Fantastic — high-fantastical —
figures they did cut in their finery. But in demeanour
they were quite simple, quite serious, these eight
English peasants. They had trudged hither from the
neighbouring village that was their home. And they
danced quite simply, quite seriously. One of them,
I learned, was a cobbler, another a baker, and the rest
were farm-labourers. And their fathers and their
fathers' fathers had danced here before them, even so,
every May-day morning. They were as deeply rooted
in antiquity as the elm outside the inn. They were
here always in their season as surely as the elm put
forth its buds. And the elm, knowing them, approving
them, let its green-flecked branches dance in unison
with them.

1039



MAX BEERBOHM



The first dance was in full swing when I approached.
Only six of the men were dancers. Of the others, one
was the ' minstrel ', the other the ' dysard '. The
minstrel was playing a flute ; and the dysard I knew
by the wand and leathern bladder which he brandished
as he walked around, keeping a space for the dancers,
and chasing and buffeting merrily any man or child
who ventured too near. He, like the others, wore
a white smock decked with sundry ribands, and a top-
hat that must have belonged to his grandfather. Its
antiquity of form and texture contrasted strangely
with the freshness of the garland of paper roses that
wreathed it. I was told that the wife or sweetheart of
every Morris-dancer takes special pains to deck her
man out more gaily than his fellows. But this pious
endeavour had defeated its own end. So bewildering
was the amount of brand-new bunting attached to
all these eight men that no matron or maiden could
for the life of her have determined which was the most
splendid of them all. Besides his adventitious finery,
every dancer, of course, had in his hands the scarves
which are as necessary to his performance of the Morris
as are the bells strapped about the calves of his legs.
Waving these scarves and jangling these bells with
a stolid rhythm, the six peasants danced facing one
another, three on either side, while the minstrel fluted
and the dysard strutted around. That minstrel's
tune runs in my head even now — a queer little stolid
tune that recalls vividly to me the aspect of the dance.
It is the sort of tune Bottom the Weaver must often
have danced to in his youth. . . After they had drunk
some ale, they formed up for the second dance — a
circular dance. And anon, above the notes of the flute
and the jangling of the bells and the stamping of
1040



MAX BEERBOHM



the boots, I seemed to hear the knell actually toll.
Hoot ! Hoot ! Hoot ! A motor-car came fussing and
fuming in its cloud of dust. Hoot ! Hoot ! The
dysard ran to meet it, brandishing his wand of office.
He had to stand aside. Hoot ! The dancers had just
time to get out of the way. The scowling motorists
vanished. Dancers and dysard, presently visible
through the subsiding dust, looked rather foolish and
crestfallen. And all the branches of the Tory old elm
above them seemed to be quivering with indignation.

Yet Again

588 The Qolden Drugget

IT is on nights when the wind blows its hardest,
but makes no rift anywhere for a star to peep
through, that the Golden Drugget, as I approach it,
gladdens my heart the most. The distance between
Rapallo and my home up yonder is rather more than
two miles. The road curves and zigzags sharply, for
the most part ; but at the end of the first mile it runs
straight for three or four hundred yards ; and, as the
inn stands at a point midway on this straight course,
the Golden Drugget is visible to me long before I
come to it. Even by starlight, it is good to see. How
much better, if I happen to be out on a black rough
night when nothing is disclosed but this one calm
bright thing. Nothing? Well, there has been
descriable, all the way, a certain grey glimmer im-
mediately in front of my feet. This, in point of fact,
is the road, and by following it carefully I have
managed to escape collision with trees, bushes, stone
walls. The continuous shrill wailing of trees' branches
writhing unseen but near, and the great hoarse roar

104 1



MAX BEERBOHM

of the sea against the rocks far down below, are no
cheerful accompaniment for the buffeted pilgrim.
He feels that he is engaged in single combat with Nature
at her unfriendliest. He isn't sure that she hasn't
supernatural allies working with her — witches on
broomsticks circling closely round him, demons in
pursuit of him or waiting to leap out on him. And
how about mere robbers and cut-throats f Suppose —
but look ! that streak, yonder, look ! — the Golden
Drugget.

There it is, familiar, serene, festal. That the
pilgrim knew he would see it in due time does not
diminish for him the queer joy of seeing it ; nay, this
emotion would be far less without that fore-knowledge.
Some things are best at first sight. Others — and here
is one of them — do ever improve by recognition. I
remember that when first I beheld this steady strip of
light, shed forth over a threshold level with the road,
it seemed to me conceivably sinister. It brought
Stevenson to my mind : the chink of doubloons and
the clash of cutlasses ; and I think I quickened pace
as I passed it. But now ! — now it inspires in me a sense
of deep trust and gratitude ; and such awe as I have
for it is altogether a loving awe, as for holy ground
that should be trod lightly. A drugget of crimson
cloth across a London pavement is rather resented by
the casual passer-by, as saying to him ' Step across me,
stranger, but not along me, not in ! ' and for answer
he spurns it with his heel. ' Stranger, come in ! ' is
the clear message of the Golden Drugget. ' This is
but a humble and earthly hostel, yet you will find here
a radiant company of angels and archangels.' And
always I cherish the belief that if I obeyed the summons
I should receive fulfilment of the promise. Well, the
1042



MAX BEERBOHM



beliefs that one most cherishes one is least willing to
test. I do not go in at that open door. But lingering,
but reluctant, is my tread as I pass by it ; and I pause
to bathe in the light that is as the span of our human
life, granted between one great darkness and another.

And Even Note

GILBERT KEITH CHESTERTON

1874-

5<?9 £Mr. ^Pickwick

PICKWICK goes through life with that god-like
gullibility which is the key to all adventures. The
greenhorn is the ultimate victor in everything ; it is
he that gets the most out of life. Because Pickwick is
led away by Jingle, he will be led to the White Hart
Inn, and see the only Weller cleaning boots in the
courtyard. Because he is bamboozled by Dodson and
Fogg, he will enter the prison house like a paladin, and
rescue the man and the woman who have wronged
him most. His soul will never starve for exploits or
excitements who is wise enough to be made a fool of.
He will make himself happy in the traps that have
been laid for him ; he will roll in their nets and
sleep. All doors will fly open to him who has a mild-
ness more defiant than mere courage. The whole is
unerringly expressed in one fortunate phrase — he will
be always ' taken in.' To be taken in everywhere is to
see the inside of everything. It is the hospitality of
circumstance. With torches and trumpets, like a
guest, the greenhorn is taken in by Life. And the
sceptic is cast out by it.

Charles Dickens



1043



GILBERT KEITH CHESTERTON



590 The Battle of the iMarne

THE driven and defeated line stood at last almost
under the walls of Paiis ; and the world waited for
the doom of the city. The gates seemed to stand
open ; and the Prussian was to ride into it for the
third and the last time : for the end of its long epic
of liberty and equality was come. And still the very
able and very French individual on whom rested the
last hope of the seemingly hopeless Alliance stood
unruffled as a rock, in every angle of his sky-blue jacket
and his bulldog figure. He had called his bewildered
soldiers back when they had broken the invasion at
Guise ; he had silently digested the responsibility of
dragging on the retreat, as in despair, to the last
desperate leagues before the capital ; and he stood and
watched. And even as he watched the whole huge
invasion swerved.

Out through Paris and out and round beyond Paris,
other men in dim blue coats swung out in long lines
upon the plain, slowly folding upon Von Kluck like
blue wings. Von Kluck stood an instant ; and then,
flinging a few secondary forces to delay the wing that
was swinging round on him, dashed across the Allies'
line at a desperate angle, to smash it in the centre as
with a hammer. It was less desperate than it seemed ;
for he counted, and might well count, on the moral
and physical bankruptcy of the British line and the
end of the French line immediately in front of him,
which for six days and nights he had chased before
him like autumn leaves before a whirlwind. Not
unlike autumn leaves, red-stained, dust-hued, and
tattered, they lay there as if swept into a corner.
But even as their conquerors wheeled eastwards, their
1044



GILBERT KEITH CHESTERTON



bugles blew the charge ; and the English went forward
through the wood that is called Crecy, and stamped it
with their seal for the second time, in the highest
moment of all the secular history of man.

But it was not now the Crecy in which English and
French knights had met in a more coloured age, in a
battle that was rather a tournament. It was a league
of all knights for the remains of all knighthood, of all
brotherhood in arms or in arts, against that which is
and has been radically unknightly and radically un-
brotherly from the beginning. Much was to happen
after — murder and naming folly and madness in earth
and sea and sky ; but all men knew in their hearts that
the third Prussian thrust had failed, and Christendom
was delivered once more. The empire of blood and
iron rolled slowly back towards the darkness of the
northern forests ; and the great nations of the West
went forward ; where side by side as after a long lover's
quarrel, went the ensigns of St. Denys and St. George.

The Crimes of England

JOHN MASEFIELD

1875-

591 The Qlipper

WHEN I saw her first there was a smoke of mist
about her as high as her foreyard. Her topsails
and flying kites had a faint glow upon them where the
dawn caught them. Then the mist rolled away from
her, so that we could see her hull and the glimmer of
the red sidelight as it was hoisted inboard. She was
rolling slightly, tracing an arc against the heaven, and
as I watched her the glow upon her deepened, till

1945



JOHN MASEFIELD

every sail she wore burned rosily like an opal turned
to the sun, like a fiery jewel. She was radiant, she
was of an immortal beauty, that swaying, delicate
clipper. Coming as she came, out of the mist into the
dawn, she was like a spirit, like an intellectual presence.
Her hull glowed, her rails glowed ; there was colour
upon the boats and tackling. She was a lofty ship
(with skysails and royal staysails), and it was wonderful
to watch her, blushing in the sun, swaying and
curveting. She was alive with a more than mortal
life. One thought that she would speak in some
strange language or break out into a music which
would express the sea and that great flower in the sky.
She came trembling down to us, rising up high and
plunging ; showing the red lead below her water-line ;
then diving down till the smother bubbled over her
hawseholes. She bowed and curveted ; the light
caught the skylights on the poop ; she gleamed and
sparkled ; she shook the sea from her as she rose.
There was no man aboard of us but was filled with the
beauty of that ship. I think they would have cheered
her had she been a little nearer to us ; but, as it was,
we ran up our flags in answer to her, adding our
position and comparing our chronometers, then
dipping our ensigns and standing away. For some
minutes I watched her, as I made up the flags before
putting them back in their cupboard. The old mate
limped up to me, and spat, and swore. ' That 's one
of the beautiful sights of the world,' he said. ' That,
and a cornfield, and a woman with her child. It 's
beauty and strength. How would you like to have
one of them skysails round your neck ? ' I gave him
some answer, and continued to watch her, till the
beautiful, precise hull, with all its lovely detail, had
1046



JOHN MASEFIELD

become blurred to leeward, where the sun was now
marching in triumph, the helm of a golden warrior
plumed in cinus.

A Tarpaulin Muster : A Memory

S92 Qleiving up the Royals

AFTER a day of it, as we sat below, we felt our mad
X\. ship taking yet wilder leaps, bounding over yet
more boisterous hollows, and shivering and exulting
in every inch of her. She seemed filled with a fiery,
unquiet life. She seemed inhuman, glorious, spiritual.
One forgot that she was man's work. We forgot that
we were men. She was alive, immortal, furious We
were her minions and servants. We were the star-dust
whirled in the train of the comet. We banged our
plates with the joy we had in her. We sang and shouted
and called her the glory of the seas.

There is an end to human glory. ' Greatness a
period hath, no sta-ti-on.' The end to our glory came
when, as we sat at dinner, the door swung back from
its hooks and a mate in oilskins bade us come on deck
' without stopping for our clothes '. It was time.
She was carrying no longer ; she was dragging. To
windward the sea was blotted in a squall. The line
of the horizon was masked in a grey film. The glory
of the sea had given place to greyness and grimness.
Her beauty had become savage. The music of the
wind had changed to a howl as of hounds.

And then we began to ' take it off her ', to snug her
down, to check her in her stride. We went to the
clewlines and clewed the royals up. Then it was,
' Up there, you boys, and make the royals fast.' My
royal was the mizen-royal, a rag of a sail among the

1047



JOHN MASEFIELD

clouds, a great grey rag, which was leaping and
slatting a hundred and sixty feet above me. The wind
beat me down against the shrouds, it banged me and
beat me, and blew the tears from my eyes. It seemed
to lift me up the futtocks into the top, and up the
topmast rigging to the cross-trees. In the cross-trees
I learned what wind was.

It came roaring past with a fervour and a fury
which struck me breathless. I could only look aloft
to the yard I was bound for and heave my panting
body up the rigging. And there was the mizen-royal.
There was the sail I had come to furl. And a wonder
of a sight it was. It was blowing and bellying in the
wind, and leaping around ' like a drunken colt ', and
flying over the yard, and thrashing and flogging It
was roaring like a bull with its slatting and thrashing.
The royal mast was bending to the strain of it. To
my eyes it was buckling like a piece of whalebone. I
lay out on the yard, and the sail hit me in the face
and knocked my cap away. It beat me and banged me,
and blew from my hands. The wind pinned me flat
against the yard, and seemed to be blowing all my
clothes to shreds. I felt like a king, like an emperor.
I shouted aloud with the joy of that ' rastle ' with
the sail. Forward of me was the main mast, with
another lad, fighting another royal ; and beyond him
was yet another, whose sail seemed tied in knots.
Below me was the ship, a leaping mad thing, with little
silly figures, all heads and shoulders, pulling silly
strings along the deck. There was the sea, sheer under
me, and it looked grey and grim, and streaked with
the white of our smother.

A Tarpaulm Muster : Being Ashore



1048



GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN



1876-

593 Cjaribaldi

WHEN in 1848 he returned to fight for Italy, in
the full strength of matured manhood — at the
time of life when Cromwell first drew sword — he had
been sheltered, ever since he went to sea at fifteen^
from every influence which might have turned him
into an ordinary man or an ordinary soldier.

He had had two schools — the seas of romance, and
the plateaus of South America. He had lived on
shipboard and in the saddle. The man who loved
Italy as even she has seldom been loved, scarcely knew
her. The soldier of modern enlightenment was him-
self but dimly enlightened. Rather, his mind was like
a vast sea cave, filled with the murmur of dark waters
at flow and the stirring of nature's greatest forces, lit
here and there by streaks of glorious sunshine buisting
in through crevices hewn at random in its rugged sides.
He had all the distinctive qualities of the hero, in their
highest possible degree, and in their very simplest
form. Courage and endurance without limit ; tender-
ness to man and to all living things, which was never
blunted by a life-time of war in two hemispheres
among combatants often but half civilized ; the
power to fill men with ardour by his presence and to
stir them by his voice to great deeds, but above all
the passion to be striking a blow for the oppressed, a
passion which could not be quenched by failure, nor
checked by reason, nor sated by success, old age, and
the worship of the world.

These qualities, perhaps, could not have existed in
a degree so pre-eminent, in the person either of a

1049



GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN



sage or of a saint. Without, on the one hand, the
childlike simplicity that often degenerated into folly,
and on the other hand, the full store of common
human passions that made him one with the multitude,
he could never have been so ignorant of despair and
doubt, so potent to overawe his followers and to carry
men blindfold into enterprises which would have been
madness under any other chief. The crowning work
of his life was in i860, when he landed with a thousand
ill-armed volunteers in the Island of Sicily, to over-
come a garrison of 24,000 well-armed and well-
disciplined men. Moltke could no more have con-
quered Sicily with such means, than Garibaldi could
have planned the battle of Sedan.

Garibaldi's Defence of the Roman Republic

594 Cjaribaldi in the Assembly

ABOUT midday on June 30, while Manara was
JLx. dying in the hospital, Garibaldi was galloping
across the Tiber to the Capitol, whither the Assembly
of the Roman Republic had summoned him to attend
its fateful session. He rode in haste, for though the
fighting had died away, he would not consent to be
absent from his post longer than one hour. He had
missed death in the battle, and his heart was bitter
within him. To add to his misery, news had just been
brought that his faithful negro friend, Aguyar, who
had so often guarded his life in the perils of war, had
been killed by a shell whilst walking across a street in
the Trastevere. Garibaldi, who was far above base
racial pride, and regarded all men as brothers to be
valued each according to his deserts, had given his love
freely to the noble Othello, who in body and soul
1050



GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN



alike far surpassed the common type of white man.
Sore at heart, and pre-occupied by bitter thoughts, he
galloped up to the Capitol, dismounted, and entered
the Assembly as he was, his red shirt covered with
dust and blood, his face still moist with the sweat of
battle, his sword so bent that it stuck half-way out of
the scabbard. The members, deeply moved, rose to
their feet and cheered, as he walked slowly to the
tribune and mounted the steps.

They had sent to ask his advice on the three plans,
between which, as Mazzini had told them in his
speech that morning, they were now reduced to
choose. They could surrender ; they could die
fighting in the streets ; or, lastly, they could make
their exodus into the mountains, taking with them
the Government and the army. This third plan was
that which Garibaldi had for days past been urging
on the Triumvirate, and he now pressed the Assembly
to adopt it, in a brief and vigorous speech.

He brushed aside the idea of continuing the defence
of Rome. It could no longer, he showed them, be
carried on even by street righting, for the Trastevere
must be abandoned, and the enemy's cannon from
the height of San Pietro in Montorio could reduce
the capital of the world to ashes. As to surrender, he
does not seem to have discussed it. There remained
the third plan — to carry the Government and army
into the wilderness. This he approved. ' Dovunque
saremo, cold sard Roma ' (' Wherever we go, there will
be Rome '), he said. This was the part he had chosen
for himself and for everyone who would come with
him. But he wished to have only volunteers, and to
take no one on false pretences. He declared that he
could promise nothing, and very honestly drew for

1051



GEORGE MACAULAY TREVELYAN



the senators a picture of the life of danger and hardship
to which he invited them.

Altogether it was a wise and noble speech, for it
put an end to all thought of bringing further ruin on
the buildings of Rome, and at the same time offered
a path of glory and sacrifice to those who, like himself,
were determined never to treat with the foreigner on
Italian soil. Having spoken, he left the hall and
galloped back to the Janiculum.

GaribaWs Defence of the Roman Republic

JAMES HOPWOOD JEANS

1877-

595 T/ie Services of ^Astronomy

TO the fundamental question of the meaning of
human existence, astronomy has little of positive
value to offer. It must be so, for the discussion of the
question turns in the last resort on the ultimate
significance of mind and matter. Astronomy knows
nothing of mind and must perforce take matter for
granted. But she can perhaps render some service in
the humbler capacity of checking and criticizing the
various conjectures which human thought has put
forward as answers. The answers given by the human
race in its infancy, the presumptuous answers which
assumed in one form or another that terrestrial life
was the sole reason for the existence of the myriads of
stars in the firmament, met their death at the hands
of Copernicus, an astronomer, and of Galileo, another
astronomer. The arrogance of this view gave place
to the humility of the succeeding view, which held
that each of these millions of stars gave heat and light
1052



JAMES HOPWOOD JEANS

to families of planets peopled by living beings similar
to ourselves, and of course quite as important as
ourselves. But astronomy now seems to suggest that
perhaps the pendulum has swung too far. We begin
to suspect that life is not the normal accompaniment
of a sun, since planets capable of sustaining life are
not the normal accompaniments of suns. Astronomy
does not know whether or not life is important in
the scheme of nature, but she begins to whisper that
it must necessarily be somewhat rare. Her suggestions,
although still vague, seem to indicate that our terres-
trial life forms a greater proportion of the sum total
of all the life of the universe than we at one time
thought.

The Nebular Hypothesis and Modern Cosmogony

GILES LYTTON STRACHEY

1880-

596 The Loss of the ^Prince Qonsort

THE sudden removal of the Prince was not merely
a matter of overwhelming personal concern to
Victoria ; it was an event of national, of European
importance. He was only forty-two, and in the
ordinary course of nature he might have been expected
to live at least thirty years longer. Had he done so it
can hardly be doubted that the whole development of
the English polity would have been changed. Already
at the time of his death he filled a unique place in
English public life ; already among the inner circle
of politicians he was accepted as a necessary and useful
part of the mechanism of the State. Lord Clarendon,
for instance, spoke of his death as ' a national calamity

i°53



GILES LYTTON STRACHEY

of far greater importance than the public dream of
and lamented the loss of his ' sagacity and foresight ',
which, he declared, would have been ' more than ever
valuable' in the event of an American war. And,
as time went on, the Prince's influence must have
enormously increased. For, in addition to his intel-
lectual and moral qualities, he enjoyed, by virtue of
his position, one supreme advantage which every other
holder of high office in the country was without : he
was permanent. Politicians came and went, but
the Prince was perpetually installed at the centre of
affairs. Who can doubt that, towards the end of the
century, such a man, grown grey in the service of the
nation, virtuous, intelligent, and with the unexampled
experience of a whole lifetime of government, would
have acquired an extraordinary prestige ? If, in his
youth, he had been able to pit the Crown against the
mighty Palmerston and to come off with equal honours
from the contest, of what might he not have been
capable in his old age f What Minister, however able,
however popular, could have withstood the wisdom,
the irreproachability, the vast prescriptive authority,
of the venerable Prince? It is easy to imagine how,
under such a ruler, an attempt might have been made
to convert England into a State as exactly organized,
as elaborately trained, as efficiently equipped, and as
autocratically controlled, as Prussia herself. Then
perhaps, eventually, under some powerful leader —
a Gladstone or a Bright — the democratic forces in
the country might have rallied together, and a struggle
might have followed in which the Monarchy would
have been shaken to its foundations. Or, on the other
hand, Disraeli's hypothetical prophecy might have
come true. ' With Prince Albert ', he said, ' we have
i°54



GILES LYTTON STRACHEY



buried our sovereign. This German Prince has
governed England for twenty-one years with a wisdom
and energy such as none of our lings have ever shown.
. . If he had out-lived some of our " old stagers "
he would have given us the blessings of absolute
Government.'

The English Constitution — that indescribable entity
— is a living thing, growing with the growth of men,
and assuming ever-varying forms in accordance with
the subtle and complex laws of human character.
It is the child of wisdom and chance. The wise men
of 1688 moulded it into the shape we know ; but the
chance that George I could not speak English gave it
one of its essential peculiarities— the system of a
Cabinet independent of the Crown and subordinate
to the Prime Minister. The wisdom of Lord Grey
saved it from petrifaction and destruction, and set it
upon the path of Democracy. Then chance inter-
vened once more ; a female sovereign happened to
marry an able and pertinacious man ; and it seemed
likely that an element which had been quiescent
within it for years — the element of irresponsible
administrative power — was about to become its pre-
dominant characteristic and to change completely
the direction of its growth. But what chance gave,
chance took away. The Consort perished in his prime ;
and the English Constitution, dropping the dead limb
with hardly a tremor, continued its mysterious life
as if he had never been.

One human being, and one alone, felt the full force
of what had happened. The Baron, by his fireside
at Coburg, suddenly saw the tremendous fabric of
his creation crash down into sheer and irremediable
ruin. Albert was gone, and he had lived in vain.

i°SS



GILES LYTTON STRACHEY



Even his blackest hypochondria had never envisioned
quite so miserable a catastrophe. Victoria wrote to
him, visited him, tried to console him by declaring
with passionate conviction that she would carry on
her husband's work. He smiled a sad smile and looked
into the fire. Then he murmured that he was going
where Albert was — that he would not be long. He
shrank into himself. His children clustered round him
and did their best to comfort him, but it was useless :
the Baron's heart was broken. He lingered for eighteen
months, and then, with his pupil, explored the shadow
and the dust.

Queen Victoria

597 The Massing of Victoria

WHEN, two days previously, the news of the
approaching end had been made public, aston-
ished grief had swept over the country. It appeared
as if some monstrous reversal of the course of nature
was about to take place. The vast majority of her
subjects had never known a time when Queen Victoria
had not been reigning over them. She had become
an indissoluble part of their whole scheme of things,
and that they were about to lose her appeared a scarcely
possible thought. She herself, as she lay blind and
silent, seemed to those who watched her to be divested
of all thinking — to have glided already, unawares, into
oblivion. Yet, perhaps, in the secret chambers of
consciousness, she had her thoughts, too. Perhaps her
fading mind called up once more the shadows of the
past to float before it, and retraced, for the last time,
the vanished visions of that long history — passing back
and back, through the cloud of years, to older and ever
1056



GILES LYTTON STRACHEY



older memories — to the spring woods at Osborne, so
full of primroses for Lord Beaconsfield — to Lord
Palmerston's queer clothes and high demeanour, and
Albert's face under the green lamp, and Albert's first
stag at Balmoral, and Albert in his blue and silver
uniform, and the Baron coming in through a doorway,
and Lord M. dreaming at Windsor with the rooks
cawing in the elm-trees, and the Archbishop of Canter-
bury on his knees in the dawn, and the old King's
turkey-cock ejaculations, and Uncle Leopold's soft
voice at Claremont, and Lehzen with the globes, and
her mother's feathers sweeping down towards her, and
a great old repeater-watch of her father's in its tortoise-
shell case, and a yellow rug, and some friendly flounces
of sprigged muslin, and the trees and the grass at
Kensington.

Queen Victoria

COMPTON MACKENZIE

1883-

59S ' The Basket of Ttyses'

SOME four-and-twenty miles from Curtain Wells
on the Great West Road is a tangle of briers
among whose blossoms an old damask rose is sometimes
visible. If the curious traveller should pause and
examine this fragrant wilderness, he will plainly per-
ceive the remains of an ancient garden, and if he be of
an imaginative character of mind will readily recall the
legend of the Sleeping Beauty in her mouldering
palace ; for some enchantment still enthralls the spot,
so that he who bravely dares the thorns is well re-
warded with pensive dreams and, as he lingers a while
gathering the flowers or watching their petals flutter
2830 m m 1057



COMPTON MACKENZIE



to the green shadows beneath, will haply see elusive
Beauty hurry past.

Here at the date of this tale stood the Basket of
Roses Inn, a mile or so away from a small village. When
coaches ceased to run, the house began to lose its
custom, and, as stone is scarce hereabouts, was presently
pulled down in order to provide the Parson with a
peculiarly bleak Parochial Hall.

However, this melancholy fate was still distant, and
old Simon Tabrum had a fine custom from the coaches
and private travellers who delighted to spend a night
in so sweet a lodging.

The Basket of Roses was the fairest, dearest inn down
all that billowy London road. The counter, sheathed
in a case of pewter, the glasses all in a row, the sleek
barrels and the irregular lines of home-brewed cordials,
charmed the casual visitor to a more intimate acquain-
tance. Behind the tap was the Travellers' Room, and
what a room it was — with great open fireplaces and
spits and bubbling kettles and blackened ingles. Long-
buried ancestors of the village had carved their rude
initials over each high-backed bench and battered the
bottoms of the great tankards into unexpected dents
by many rollicking choruses in the merry dead past.
The walls of this room knew the pedigree of every
bullock and the legend of every ghost for many miles
round. Here was the cleanest floor, the clearest fire
in England.

Old Tabrum the landlord was the very man for the
house — the very man to bring out all that was most
worthy in his guests. He always produced good wine
and a piping hot supper, never asked for his money till
his guests were satisfied, and always wore an apron as
white as the foam of his cool deep ale.
1058



COMPTON MACKENZIE



He was eighty years old now, with a bloom on his
cheeks like an autumn pippin and two limpid blue eyes
that looked straight into yours and, if you had any
reverence at all, made the tears well involuntarily at
the sight of such gentle beauty.

Once he was a famous Basso Profundo, but now his
voice was high and thin, and seemed already fraught
with faint aerial music. The ancient man was a great
gardener as properly became a landlord whose sign was
a swinging posy. What a garden there was at the back
of this florious inn. The bowling-green surrounded by
four grey walls was the finest ever known, and as for
the borders, deep borders twelve feet wide, they were
full of every sweet flower. There were Columbines and
Canterbury Bells and blue Bells of Coventry and
Lilies and Candy Goldilocks with Penny flowers or
White Sattin and Fair Maids of France and Fair Maids
of Kent and London Pride.

There was Herb of Grace and Rosemary and
Lavender to pluck and crush between your fingers,
while some one rolled the jack across the level green of
the ground. In Spring there were Tulips and Jacynths,
Dames' Violets and Primroses, Cowslips of Jerusalem,
Daffodils and Pansies, Lupins like spires in the dusk,
and Ladies' Smocks in the shadowed corners. As for
Summer, why the very heart of high June and hot
July dwelt in that fragrant enclosure. Sweet Johns
and Sweet Williams with Dragon flowers and crimson
Peaseblossom and tumbling Peonies, Blue Moonwort
and the Melancholy Gentlemen, Larksheels, Marigolds,
Hearts, Hollyhocks and Candy Tufts. There was
Venus' Looking Glass and Flower of Bristol, and Apple
of Love and Blue Helmets and Herb Paris and Campion
and Love in a Mist and Ladies' Laces and Sweet



M m 2



COMPTON MACKENZIE



Sultans or Turkey Cornflowers, Gillyflower Carnations
(Ruffling Rob of Westminster amongst them) with
Dittany and Sops in Wine and Floramer, Widow Wail
and Bergamot, True Thyme and Gilded Thyme, Good
Night at Noon and Flower de Luce, Golden Mouse-ear,
Princes' Feathers, Pinks, and deep-red Damask Roses.
It was a very wonderful garden indeed.

The Passionate Elopement

RUPERT BROOKE

1887-1915

599

' Her foundations are upon the holy hills '

SOME say the Declaration of War threw us into
a primitive abyss of hatred and the lust for blood.
Others declare that we behaved very well. I do not
know. I only know the thoughts that flowed through
the mind of a friend of mine when he heard the news.
My friend — I shall make no endeavour to excuse him
— is a normal, even ordinary man, wholly English,
twenty-four years old, active and given to music. By
a chance he was ignorant of the events of the world
during the last days of July. He was camping with
some friends in a remote part of Cornwall, and had
gone on, with a companion, for a four-days' sail. So
it wasn't till they beached her again that they heard.
A youth ran down to them with a telegram : 'We're at
war with Germany. We've joined France and Russia.'

My friend ate and drank, and then climbed a hill of
gorse, and sat alone, looking at the sea. His mind was
full of confused images, and the sense of strain. In
answer to the word ' Germany ', a train of vague
thoughts dragged across his brain. The pompous
1060



RUPERT BROOKE

middle-class vulgarity of the building of Berlin ;
the wide and restful beauty of Munich ; the taste of
beer ; innumerable quiet, glittering caje* ; the Ring ;
the swish of evening air in the face, as one skis down
past the pines ; a certain angle of the eyes in the face ;
long nights of drinking, and singing, and laughter ;
the admirable beauty of German wives and mothers ;
certain friends ; some tunes ; the quiet length of
evening over the Starnberger-See. Between him and
the Cornish sea he saw quite clearly an April morning
on a lake south of Berlin, the grey water slipping past
his little boat, and a peasant-woman, suddenly re-
vealed against apple-blossom, hanging up blue and
scarlet garments to dry in the sun. Children played
about her ; and she sang as she worked. . .

A cloud over the sun woke him to consciousness of his
own thoughts ; and he found, with perplexity, that
they were continually recurring to two periods of his
life, the days after the death of his mother, and the
time of his first deep estrangement from one he loved.
After a bit he understood this. Now, as then, his mind
had been completely divided into two parts : the upper
running about aimlessly from one half -relevant thought
to another, the lower unconscious half labouring with
some profound and unknowable change. This feeling
of ignorant helplessness linked him with those past
crises. His consciousness was like the light scurry
of waves at full tide, when the deeper waters are
pausing and gathering and turning home. Something
was growing in his heart, and he couldn't tell what.
But as he thought ' England and Germany ', the word
' England ' seemed to flash like a line of foam. With a
sudden tightening of his heart, he realized that there
might be a raid on the English coast. He didn't

1061



RUPERT BROOKE

imagine any possibility of it succeeding, but only of
enemies and warfare on English soil. The idea sickened
him. He was immensely surprised to perceive that
the actual earth of England held for him a quality
which he found in A — , and in a friend's honour, and
scarcely anywhere else, a quality which, if he'd ever
been sentimental enough to use the word, he'd have
called ' holiness '. His astonishment grew as the full
flood of ' England ' swept him on from thought to
thought. He felt the triumphant helplessness of a
lover. Grey, uneven little fields, and small, ancient
hedges rushed before him, wild flowers, elms and
beeches, gentleness, sedate houses of red brick, proudly
unassuming, a countryside of rambling hills and
friendly copses. He seemed to be raised high, looking
down on a landscape compounded of the western
view from the Cotswolds, and the Weald, and the high
land in Wiltshire, and the Midlands seen from the hills
above Prince's Risborough. And all this to the accom-
paniment of tunes heard long ago, an intolerable
number of them being hymns. There was, in his
mind, a confused multitude of faces, to most of which
he could not put a name. At one moment he was on
an Atlantic liner, sick for home, making Plymouth at
nightfall ; and at another, diving into a little rocky
pool through which the Teign flows, north of Bovey ;
and again, waking, stiff with dew, to see the dawn
come up over the Royston plain. And continually he
seemed to see the set of a mouth which he knew for
his mother's, and A — 's face, and, inexplicably, the
face of an old man he had once passed in a Warwick-
shire village. To his great disgust, the most common-
place sentiments found utterance in him. At the same
time he was extraordinarily happy. . .

From his last prose writings

j 062



6oo



Epilogue



CELESTIAL gift of divine liberality,
descending from the Father of light to raise
up the rational soul even to heaven. . . Un-
doubtedly, indeed, thou hast placed thy desirable
tabernacle in books, where the Most High, the
Light of light, the Book of Life, hath established
thee. Here then all who ask receive, all who
seek find thee, to those who knock thou openest
quickly. In books cherubim expand their wings,
that the soul of the student may ascend and look
around from pole to pole, from the rising and the
setting sun, from the north and from the sea. In
them the most high and incomprehensible God
Himself is contained and worshipped.

Richard de Bury, 1281-1345, PMobiblon • translated
by John Belltngham Inglts, 1832



INDEX OF AUTHORS, TITLES
AND SOURCES



NO.

Aihm OF Eynshame. (Englished c 1480)
The Monk awakes from his Vision (The 1482 edition of William
de Machlines, chap. 181) . . . . -27

Addison, Joseph (1672-1719)

Mr. Shapely (Spectator, No. 475) . . 228

Will Wimble (ibid., No. 108) ... . 229

Sir Roger at Church (ibid., No. 112) 230

Sir Roger goes to Spring Garden (ibid., No. 383) . . 231

The Royal Exchange (ibid., No. 69) 232

Westminster Abbey (ibid., No. 26) 233

The Vision of Mirza (ibid., No. 159) 234

My Garden (ibid., No. 477) . .... 235

Adlincton, William (fl. 1566)

Cupid and Psyche (The Golden Ass, Book V, sect. 22) . . 104

Anonymous

The Magpie and the Eel, c. 1400 (The Knight de la Tour Landry,

chap, xvi) ... 13

The Poetry of Gardening ( The Carthusian, 1839) . . . 501

Arbuthnot, John (1667-1735)
The Christening of Martm Scnblerus (Memotrs of Martin



Scriblerus, chaps, iii, iv) 222

Arnold, Matthew (182 2-1 888)

Ideas in England (Essays m Criticism : Hanrich Heine) . 461

Oxford (ibid. : Preface) .... . . 462

Milton (ibid., Second Series : II. Milton) . . -463
Ascham, Roger (1515-1568)

Seeing the Wind (Toxophilus) . . 45

From the Preface to ' The Schoolmaster ' (The Schoolmaster) . 46

Lady Jane Grey (ibid.) ....... 47

Of Translation (ibtd ) ..... 48

Atterbury, Francis, Bishop of Rochester (1662-1732)
To his sick Daughter, about to rejoin him in his Exile (Episto-
lary Correspondence, &c, ed. 1784, Letter 89) . . . 220



1065



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Austen, Jane (1775-1817)
The John Dashwoods (Sense and Sensibility, Vol. I, chap 11) 335
Mansfield Park (Mansfield Park, Vol. I, chap. 1) . . . 336
Miss Bates at the Ball (Emma, Vol. Ill, chap, u) . . . 337

Bacon, Francis, Viscount St. Albans (1561-1626)
The Service of the Muses (Essex' Device, 1595) ... 90
Of First and Second Causes (The Advancement of Learning,

Book I) 91

Of Death. I (Essays, II) . 92

Of Death. II (An Essay on Death) 93

Of Delays (Essays, XXI) 94

Of Studies (ibid., L) 95

Of Gardens (ibid., XLVI) 96

Bagehot, Walter (1826-1877)
The Old Private Banker (Lombard Street : A Description of
the Money Market, chap, x) 472

Barrie, Sir James Matthew (i860-)
The Chairs (Margaret Ogtlvy, chap. 1) 560

Bates, Henry Walter (1825-1892)
A Naturalist's Day in the Tropics (Records of a Naturalist on
the Amazons, chap. 11) 469

Beaconsfield, Benjamin Disraeli, Earl of (1804-1881)
A Fisher of Men (Lothatr, chap, lxvni) . . . -397

Beerbohm, Max (1872-)
The Morris Dancers ( Yet Again, 2nd edition : A Morris for
May-Day) . . . .... 587

The Golden Drugget (And Even Now The Golden Drugget) . 588

Belloc, Hilaire (1870-)

The Normans (Hills and the Sea : Ely) . . . -585
Bennett, Arnold (1867-)

Swinburne (Books and Persons) 577

Benson, Arthur Christopher (1862-1925)

Henry Bradshaw (Essays : Henry Bradshaw) . . . 565
Berkeley, George, Bishop of Cloyne (1685-1753)

Matter for a May Morning ( Three Dialogues between Hylas and
Phtlonous, Dial. I, init., and Dial. Ill) . . . .244

Anodynes for the Spleen (Alaphron, Dial. II) . . 245

The Fox-hunters (ibid., Dial V, init.) 246

Berners, John Bourchier, Lord (1467-1532)

The Death of the Bruce (Frotssarl's Chronicles, chap. 20) . 28

The Battle of Crecy (ibid., chaps. 130, 131) .... 29
1066



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Berners, John Bourchier, Lord (1467-1532) — continued



The Burghers of Calais (ibid., chap. 146) .... 30

John Ball's Preaching (ibid., chap. 381) . 31

Betson, Thomas (/. 1476)
To his kinswoman Katherine Ryche (Stonor Letters and Papers,

vol. u, No. 166, Camden Society, 3rd series, vol. xxx) 26

Bible, The

Coverdale's Version, 1535 :

The Boke of Wysdome (Wisdom li. 1-9, 21-4, iii. 1-4) . . 34
The Great Bible, 1539:

Psalms xlv, cxxvi, xxm, xc . . . . 35, v-mii

Tyndale's Translation of the New Testament, 1535 :

A Vision of Judgement (St. Matthew xxvi. 31-46) . . 39
The Authorized Version, 161 1 :

Jacob at the Ford (Genesis xxxii. 22-9) .... 71

The Death of Absalom (2 Samuel xvin. 24-33) • • 7 2

4 Remember now thy Creator ' (Ecclesiastes xn 1-7) . . 73
The Song of Solomon (Song of Solomon 11. 8-17, 111. 1-5, vm.

6, 7) 74, »-»»

Dirge for the King of Babylon (Isaiah xiv. 9-12) . . 75
' Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty ' (Isaiah xxxiu.

i7- 2 4) 76"

The Wilderness (Isaiah xxxv. 1-10) ..... 77
Surge, llluminare ! (Isaiah Ix. 1-3, 19-20) . . . -78

The Vision of Dry Bones (Ezehel xxxvu. 1-13) ... 79

' God's purpose is eternal! ' (2 Esdras vi. 1-6) ... 80
' Let us now praise famous men, and our fathers that begat

us ' (Ecclesiasttcus xhv. 1-14) ..... 8r

The Walk to Emmaus (St. Luke xxiv. 13-35) ... 82

' Chanty 1 (1 Corinthians xiii. 1-13) 83

' Behold, I show you a mystery ' (1 Corinthians xv. 51-8) . 84

Birrell, Augustine (1850-)

John Wesley's Journal (Miscellanies) ... . 530
Bodley, Sir Thomas (1545-1613)



His Letter to the Vice-Chancellor (Letter to the Vice-Chancellor
of Oxon. about restoring the Public Library, 23 Feb. 1597) . 54
BOLINGBROKE, HENRY St. JOHN, VlSCOUNT (1678-1751)

The Statesman and the Charlatan (Idea of a Patriot King) 241



The Sea our Element (thd ) 242

Borrow, George (1803-1881)

The Wind on the Heath (Lavengro, chap, xxv) . . 393

The Prize Fight (ibid , chap, xxvi) 394



1067



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Bos well, James (i 740-1 795)
Johnson at Oxford (Ltfe ojf Samuel Johnson : Year 1728) . 306
The Doctor has a Frolic {tbtd. : Year 1752) .... 307
First Meeting with Johnson (tbtd.: Year 1763) . . . 308

Bo wen, Charles Synge Christopher, Lord Justice (1835-
1894)

Mogul Steamship Company 0. McGregor Gow and Co. : Judge-
ment (Law Reports (1889), 23 Q.B.D. at p. 615) . . . 487
Bradley, Francis Herbert (1846-1924)
Reason and Reality (The Principles of Logic, Book III,

Part II, chap, iv, § 16) 524

Bridges, Robert (1844-)
The Quest (From The Confessions of St. Augustine, in The
Sptrtl of Man, adapting the version of Edward Bouvene

Pusey, 1800-1882) 517

A School Portrait (Memoir prefixed to Poems of Dtgby Mack-

worth Dolben) 518

Bright, John (i8n-r889)
The Angel of Death (Speech in the House of Commons, on the
Crimean War, 23 Feb. 1855) . . ... 414

BrontI, Charlotte (r8i6-i855)
On Wuthering Heights (Introduction to Wulhering Heights) . 433

Rachel (VtUette, chap, xxiu) 434

Bronte, Emily (1818-1848)

The Dream (Wuthering Heights, chap, in) .... 444
Brooke, Rupert (1887^915)

1914 . ' Her foundations are upon the holy hills ' (From his last



prose writings: Letters from America: AnU nusualY oungMan) 599

Brougham, Henry, Lord {1778-1868)

Political Second-Sight (Historical Sketches ; Mr. Dundas) . 348

Brown, John (1810-1882)

A Dog Fight (Rab and his Friends) 410

Presence of Mind (Horae Subsectvae : 'Agchtnota). . . 411

Browne, Sir Thomas (1605-1682)

Of Religious Cmhty (Religto Medici, Part I, sect. 3) . . 141

Of Harmony (tbtd., Part II, sect. 9) 142

Sleep (tbtd., Part II, sect. 12) . . . . . . 143

Pulvis et umbra sumus (Urne Burial, chap. 11) . . 144
The Mystic as Gardener (End of Cyrus' Garden, or the Quin-
cunx) .......... 145

The Heroick Mind (Christian Morals, Pan I, sect. 36) . . 146
1068



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Bunyan, John (1628-1688)
He plays Tip Cat on Sunday {Grace Abounding to the Chief of

Sinners) ... 184

Christian and Faithful come to Vanity Fair (The Pilgrim's

Progress, Part I) 185

The Valley of Humiliation {ibid ) r86

Mr. Vahant-for-truth crosses the River (ibid., Part II) . . 187
Burke, Edmund (1720-1797)
The Arena, 1770 (Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discon-
tents) ... 289

Conciliation with America, 1775 (Speech on moving the Resolu-
tion for Conciliation with the Colonies, 22 March 1775) . 290
Speech at Bristol on declining the Poll, 1780 . . .291
Mane Antoinette (Reflections on the Revolution in France) . 292
' The Labouring Poor ' (Letters on a Regicide Peace, Letter III) 293
Thomas Paine (ibid., Letter IV) ...... 294

Windsor Castle and the Bedford Level (A Letter to a Noble Lord
on the attacks made upon Mr. Burke by the Duke of Bedford

and the Earl of Lauderdale) 295

Burnet, Gilbert, Bishop of Salisbury (1643-1715)
The Battle of Dunbar (A History of His Own Time, chap, iv) . 211
The Conclusion of the Whole Matter (ibid , end) . . .212
Burnet, John (1863-)
Ignorance (The Romanes Lecture 192 3) . . . 569

Burnet, Thomas (1635 ? -I 7 I S)
Dies irae, dies ilia (A Sacred Theory of the Earth, Book III,
chap, xn) . . 203

Burney, Fanny (1752-1840)

The Holborn Beau (Evelina, Letter 46) . . 313

Impeachment of Hastings (Diary, Feb. 1788) . . 314
Burton, Robert (1577-1640)

Black Spirits and White (Anatomy of Melancholy, Part I,

sect, n, memb. 1) . • "7

Of Change of Air (ibid., Part II, sect. 11, memb. 3) . .118

Bury, Richard de (1281-1345)
Epilogue (Phtlobtblon, Cap. Primum, De Commendatione
Saptenttae et Librorum in Qutbus Sapientia Habitat , trans-
lated by John Bellingham Inglis, 1832) .... 600
Butler, Samuel (1835-1902)
The Turtle (Essays on Life, Art, and Science : Rambhngs in

Cheapstde) 489

The Statues (Erewhon, chap, v) 49°

1069



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Camden, William (1551-1623)

The Lady of the Sea (Rcmatnes concerning Britain, beginning) 55
Cannan, Charles (1858-1919)

Ingram Bywater {The Journal of Philology, vol. xxxiv, 1915) . 551, t

Capgrave, John (1393-1464) '

Times of Tribulation (Chronicle of England, a.d. 1347) . . 14
Carew, Richard (1555-1620)
The Praise of English (An Epistle on the Excellency of the

English Tongue) .85

Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881)

Tocelin of Brakelond (Past and Present, Book II, chap. 1) . 375
Teufelsdrockh's Watch-Tower (Sartor Resartus, chap. 111) . 376
Fnedrich Wilhelm's Tobacco-Parliament (Frederick the Great,

Book V, chap, vii) -377

Cavendish, George (1500-1561)
The Death of Wolsey (The Life and Death of Thomas Wolsey,
chap. 20) ......... 43

Caxton, William (1422 ?-i49i)
Discretion (Game and Playe of the Chesse) . .16
His Labours (Epilogue to Book III of the R ecuyell of Troy) . 17
His Homage to Chaucer (Preface to Boethius de Consolactone

Philosophic) . . . 18

Of Le Morte Arthur (Preface to Malory's Le Morie Arthur) . 19
Chapman, Robert W. (1881-)

Ingram Bywater (The Portrait of a Scholar) . 551, ii

Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of (1708-1778)
On the Employment of Red Indians in the American War
(Speech in the House of Lords, 20 Nov. 1777) . 258

Chaucer, Geoffrey (1340 ?-i4oo)
Little Lewis and the Astrolabe (A Treatise on the Astrolabe,
Prologue) ... ... .5

O stelliferi conditor orbis (Boethius de Consolations Philo-
sophic, Book I, metre v) ...... 6

Sms of the Tongue (The Persones Tale, §§ 42, 45, 47) . 7

Chesterfield, Philip Dormer Stanhope, Earl of (1694-1773)
The Art of Pleasing (Letters to his Son, Letter cxxix) . 252

Dissimulation (Ma., Letter clxxxiii) ... . 253

A Collateral Security (ibid., Letter ccxii) .... 254

Chesterton, Gilbert Keith (1874-)

Mr. Pickwick (Charles Dickens, chap, iv) . . . .589

The Battle of the Mame (The Crimes of England, chap, x) . 590
1070



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Church, Richard William, Dean of St. Paul's (1815-1890)
Spenser's Ideal Gentleman (English Men of Letters : Spenser) 430

Clarendon, Edward Hyde, Earl of (1609-1674)
A Small Cloud in the North (Life, Written by Himself) . .156
His Tribute to Cromwell (A History of the Rebellion and Civil

Wars in England, Book XV) . . . . . 157

The Battle of Stamford Hill (ibid., Book VII) . . 158

Character of Lord Falkland (ibid., Book VII) . . -159

Clutton-Brock, Arthur (1868-1924)
The Cardinal Virtue of Prose (Modern Essays) . . .581

Cobbett, William (1762-1835)
The Sandpit (R ural Rides : Kensington to U phusband) . . 316

Coleridge, Mary Elizabeth (1861-1907)
The Knight of Malta : a Florentine portrait in the National
Gallery (Non Sequttur) 561

Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1772-1834)
The Vale of Human Life (Biographia Ltterarta, chap, xn) . 329
Klopstock (ibid : Satyrane's Letters, Letter III) . . 330

The Verse and the Gloss (Rime of the Ancient Mariner,

Part IV) ... 331

Love of Nature (Antma Poetae) . . . . -332

Conrad, Joseph (1857-1924)

A Close Shave (Chance, Part II, chap. 111) .... 546

The Tartane (The Rover, XVI) . . ... 547
From Youth :

The Leak . . ... . 548,'

Ship on Fire ... . 548, >'

The Landfall . . . 548, «»

The East • 548, iv

Coryate, Thomas (c. 1577 ?-i6i7)
A Theological Argument (Coryal's Crudities, 'Observations
of Venice') "9

Cotton. Charles (1 630-1 687)
The Fishing-house ( The Compleal Angler, Part II, chap. 111) . 191

Courtney of Penwith, Leonard, Lord (1832-1918)

Justice (Addresses, 1908-1909) 482

COVERDALE, MlLES (1488-1568)

The Boke of Wysdome (Translation of the Bible, 1535:

Wisdom ii. 1-9, 21-4, iii. 1-4) 34

1071



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Cowley, Abraham (i 618-1667)
Of Solitude (Essays : Of Solitude) . . . 173

Of Himself (Essays : Of Myself) . .174
Fallentis senuta vitae (Essays : Of Obscurity) 175

Cowper, William (1731-1800)
Recollections of Margate (Letter to the Reverend William

Unwin, July 1779) .... . 296

The Colubriad (Letter to the same, 3 Aug 1782) . 297

A Candidate for Parliament (Letter to the Reverend John

Newton, 29 March 1784) . . ... 298

Countryside Music (Letter to the same, 18 Sept. 1784) . . 299
The Promised Visit (Letter to Lady Hesketh, 9 Feb. 1786) . 300
In at the Death (Letter to the same, 3 Mar. 1788) . . .301

Crabbe, George (1754-1832)
A Letter to Burke (Life of Crabbe, chap, iv : year 1781) . 315

Cranmer, Thomas (1489-1556)
Uses of Holy Scripture (Preface to the Great Bible, 1539) . 36



Defoe, Daniel (1661-1731)
Crusoe visits the Wreck (Robinson Crusoe) ... 216

The Footprint (tbtd.) 217

London in Plague Time (A Journal of the Plague Year) . 218

A Young Thief (The Life of Co lonel Jack) . . .219

De Quincey, Thomas (1785- 1859)

A London Waif (Confessions of an Opium-Eater) . . 361

News of Talavera (The English Matl-Coach) . 362

Our Ladies of Sorrow (Susptrta de Profundts) . . 363

Dickens, Charles (1812-1870)
David's Library (David Copperfield, chap, iv) . . 42 r

The Widow at the Grave (The Old Curiosity Shop, chap, xvn) 422
Mrs. Gamp on Steam-Engines (Martin Ckuzzlewtt, chap, xl) . 423
The Pale Young Gentleman (Great Expectations, chap, xi) . 424
The Haymakers (The Uncommercial Traveller, XXIII) . 425

Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes (1862-)
Literature in Cathay (Letters from John Chinaman) . 566

Disraeli, Benjamin : see Beaconsfield, Earl of

Dobson, Austin (1840-1921)
Mrs. Hogarth (Eighteenth Century Vignettes, Ftrst Series :
Hogarth's Sigtsmunda) . 502

Donne, John (1573-1631)
Death the Leveller (LXXX Sermons : Sermon XV) . ■ 113
1072



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Donne, John (1573-1631) — continued

All Times are God's Seasons (ibid. : Sermon II) . . .114

Hearts (Devotions upon Emergent Occasions) . . .115

The Bell (ibid.) 116

Doughty, Charles (1843-)

The Deaf and Dumb (Travels tn Arabia Deserta, Vol. I,
chap, xn) 512

The Desert Day (ibid., Vol. I, chap, xi) . . . .513
Drummond, William, of Hawthornden (1585-1649)

Ammula vagula blandula, hospes comesqxe corporis (The
Cypresse Grove) . . . . . . . .12$

Of Dying Young (ibid )....... 126

Drvden, John (1631-1700)

June 3rd, 1665 (Essay of Dramatic Poesy) .... 193

Shakespeare and Ben Jonson (ibid.) . . . 194

Chaucer (Preface to the Fables) . ... 195

Dryden grown old (ibid.) . .... 196

Earle, John (1601-1665)
A Child (M tcrocosmographie) . . . . 137
A She Precise Hypocrite (tkd.) 138

Eliot, George (Mary Ann Evans) (1819-1880)
Maggie and the Doll (The Mtll on the Floss, chap, iv) . . 448
Mrs. Linnet's Reading (Scenes of Clerical Life : Janet' s Repen-
tance, chap iv) 449

The Archery Meeting (Daniel Deronda, Book I, chap, x) . . 450

Elyot, Sir Thomas (1499 ?-i546)

Of Cooks and Tutors ( The Book named the Governor, chap, xin) . 42

Emerson, Ralph Waldo (1803-1882)
The Universal in Man (Essays : History, First Series) . -395
A Defence of Frankness (Conduct of Life: Worship) . . 396

English Liturgy, The
Collects from the First Prayer Book of Edward VI, 1549 35, i-tv
Psalms in the Version of the Great Bible, 1539 . . 35, v-vitt
The Navy Prayer (added to the Book of Common Prayer, 1662) 35,end

Evelyn, John (1620-1706)
On his Plan of a Garden Book (Letter to Sir Thomas Browne,
28 Jan. 1657/8) ... .... 176

Galley-Slaves (Diary, 7 Oct. 1644) . . 177
The Great Fire (ibid., 7 Sept. 1666) 178

Fairless, Michael (Margaret Fairless Barber) (1869-1901)
The Roadmender and the Birds (rAeiJoadmoKiw, I) . . 584

•°73



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Felltham, Owen (1602 ?-i668)

Of Preaching (Resolves : Dtvtne, Moral, Political, XX) . . 140
Ferrier, James Frederick (1808-1864)

The True End of Man [Lectures on Greek Philosophy and other

Philosophical Remains, vol. 1) 401

Fielding, Henry (1707-1754)

Mr. Allworthy and the Foundling ( Tom Jones, Book I, chap.in) 255

London River (Journal of a Voyage to Lisbon, Sunday,
30 June 1754) 256

Cat Overboard ! (ibid., Thursday, 11 July 1754) . . . 257

Fisher, John (1459-1535)
The Death of the Lady Margaret (English Works : The
Month's Mind of the noble princess Margaret, Countess of
Richmond and Derby) ..... 25

FitzGerald, Edward (1809-1883)

The Boat Race (Euphranor) 403

Speddmg' sFoiehead(LettertoFrederukTennyson, 16 Jan. 1841) 404

Florio, John (1553 7-1625)
Montaigne, Of his Friend (Translation of Montaigne's Essayes,

Book I, chap, xxvn, Of Friendship) ... -59
Of Cruelty (ibid., Book II, chap, xi, OfCrueltie) ... 60

Fortescue, Sir John (1394 '-1476 ?)

The Cheap Defence of England (The Governance of England,
chap, xn) . . . . . . . . 1 5

Fox, George (1624-1690)

The Cloud (Journal of George Fox : 1648) . . . .183

Foxe, John (1516-1587)
Rowland Taylor, Vicar of Hadleigh, Suffolk (Acts and Monu-
ments : February 1555) .... 49

Francis, Sir Philip : see ' Junius '

Froude, James Anthony (1818-1894)
The End of the Middle Age (History of England, chap. 1) . 445
The Taking of the Cacafuego (English Seamen in the Sixteenth

Century, Lecture IV) 446

Oxford Revisited (Essays : Words about Oxford) . . . 447

Fuller, Thomas (1608-1661)

The True Gentleman (77i«£fofyS/a/«, Bookll, chap. 24). . 147

The Good Sea Captain (ibid., Book II, chap. 20) . . 148

The Good Master of a College (ibid., Book II, chap. 14) . . 149

WychftVs Ashes (Church History of Britain, Book IV, cent. 15) 150
1074



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Galsworthy, John (1867-)

Death of Aunt Ann ( The Forsyte Saga, Book I, Part I, chap, ix) 580

Gaskell, Elizabeth (1810-1865)

Miss Matty goes Visiting (Cranford, chap, iv) . . .412
PhillisinLove(Co«imJ > Ai//ij ) PartIV) .... 413

Gibbon, Edward (1737-1794)
The Two Antonmes (Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire,

chap, iii) ... .... 302

Constantinople (ibid., chap, xvu) .... 303

Unworldhness of the Early Christians (ibid , chap, xv) . . 304

On his Life-Work (Memoirs of my Life and Writings) . . 305

Gissing, George (1857-1903)
Shakespeare's Island (Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft •
Summer, XXVII) 545

Glanvill, Joseph (1636-1680)
The Scholar Gipsy ( The Vanity of Dogmatizing, chap, xx) . 207

Gleig, George Robert (1796-1888)

Waterloo (Story of the Battle of "Waterloo) ... 381

Goldsmith, Oliver (1728-1774)

A Party at Vauxhall (Citizen of the World : Letter LXVIII) . 286

The Decoys (The Vicar of Wakefield, chaps, ix and xi) . 287

Dedication of The Deserted Village 288

Gosse, Sir Edmund (1849-)

Oddicombe Chapel (Father and Son, chap, vi) . . . 527

Graham, Robert Bontine Cunninghame (1852-)

On the Santa Barbara (Cartagena and the Banks of the Stnu) . 540

Grahame, Kenneth (1859-)
The Roman Road (The Go Iden Age : The Roman Road) . . 553
The Water Rat and the Sea Rat ( The Wind in the Willows) 554

Gray, Thomas (1716-1771)

Netley Abbey (Letter to the Rev. N Nicholls, 19 Nov. 1764) . 274
To H. Walpole, with a Copy of his Elegy (Stoke, 12 June 1750) 275

Green, John Richard (1837-1883)
The Universities and Feudalism (A Short History of the English
People, chap, in, § iv) 49 1

Greville, Fulke, Lord Brooke (1554-1628)
A Honeymoon (Letter sent to an honourable Lady, in 1633 ed.

ofGreville's Workes, cap. i) 62

1075



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Hakluyt, Richard (1552 ?-i6i6)

The First Landing in Virginia (Prtnctpatt Navigations,
Voiages, and Discoveries of the English Nation, ed. 1589 :
The Voyages of the third and last part) . . -57

The Death of Thomas Doughty at Port St. Julian {ibid , The
Third and Last Volume, 1600) . . -58
Halifax, Sir George Savile, Marquis of (1633-1695)

Charles II (Political, Moral, and Miscellaneous Thoughts and
Reflections) ... . . 200

Look to your Moat (A Rough Draft of a New Model at Sea) . 201
Hall, Edward (d. 1547)

The End of the Krekers (Chronicles of Henry VIII, The XVI

Yeere) ... 41

Hall, Henry Fielding (1859-)

A Burmese on the English (The Inward Light, chap, xi) . . 555
Hall, William Edward (1835-1894)

A Prophecy. (Preface to the Third Edition of International

Law, 1889) . 488

Hardy, Thomas (1840-)

Midnight on St. Thomas's Eve (Far from the Madding Crowd,
chap.ii) ... .... 503

The Victory Passes ( The Trumpet Major, chap, xxxi v) 504

A Tree-planting (The Woodlanders, chap, vin) . . 505

Marty has her Reward (ibid., chap, xlvm ad fin.) . 506
Harrington, James (1611-1677)

Oceana (Oceana, Introduction) .... 160
Hawthorne, Nathaniel (1804-1864)

Phcebe's Bedchamber (ffotwo/rfie Seven Gables, chap, v) . 398
Hazlitt, William (1778-1830)

On Going a Journey (Table-Talk : On Going a Journey) . 349

The Spint of Humanity in Shakespeare (Comic Writers) . . 350

The Pleasures of Reading (The Plain Speaker ; Works, vn. 127) 351

JohnCavanagh(raik-7W&) 352

Hearn, Lafcadio (1850-1904)

A Japanese Garden (Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan, XVI) . 532

Henley, William Ernest (1849-1903)
Other Sea- Poets and Longfellow (Views and Reviews : Litera-
ture, Longfellow) ... ... 528

Raebura (ibid. : Art, Raeburn) 529

Herbert of Cherbury, Lord (1583-1648)
The Knot of Ribband (Life... Written by Himself) . .123
1076



TITLES AND SOURCES

NO.

Hewlett, Maurice (1861-1923)
Mascalls {Wiltshire Essays) 564

Hexham, Henry (1585 ?-i6so)
The Assault on Ostend, 7 January 1602 (Stuart Tracts, 1(103-
1693 : An English Garner) 127

Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679)
Disastrous Effects of an Afternoon Performance (Leviathan,

Part I, chap, vm) .128

Out of Civil States, there is always Warre (ibid., Part I,

chap, xm) ....... . 129

The Papacy (ibid , Part IV, chap, xlvn) . . . 130

Holcroft, Thomas (1745-1809)
Life in a Racing-Stable (Memoirs, written by Himself, chap, xin) 3 1 1

Holinshed, Raphael (fl. 1578)
The Weird Sisters (History of Scotland, ed. 1577, p. 243) . 56

Hollond, John Ifl. 1638)

A Discourse of the Navy (Mr. Hollond His First Discourse

of the Navy) 139

Holmes, Oliver Wendell (1809-1894)

The Lost Sloop (The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table, IX) . 405

Hooker, Richard (1554-1600)
Laws of Nature (The Laws of Ecclesiaslicall Politic, Book I,

chap. lii. 3) 67

Man's Ascending Search (ibid , Book I, chap, xi) . . 68

The Permanence of Government (ibid , Book I, chap, x) . . 69

Howell, James (1594-1666)
The Pied Piper (Epistolae Ho-Eltanae : Familiar Letters,

1 Oct. 1643) .136

Hudson, W. H. (1841-1922)
The Return of the Chiff -Chaff (A Traveller in Little Tktngs) . 507
Birds and Death (Birds in Town and Village : Birds in a

Village) 5°8

Pilgrims at the Land's End ( The Land's End, chap xx) . 509
Hughes, Thomas (1822-1896)
Coaching to School ( Tom Brown's Schooldays, chap, iv) . . 465
The First Bump (Tom Brown at Oxford, chap, xin) . . 466
Hume, David (1711-1776)
Delicacy of Taste and Delicacy of Passion (Essays : First

Essay) 267

Foreign Trade (Essays : Essay of Commerce) . . ■ 268

1077



INDEX OF AUTHORS

NO.

Hunt, Leigh (1784-1859)

His Prison (Autobiography, chap, xiv) 358

Furze on Wimbledon Common {Table-Talk : The Atlas,
25 April 1846) ........ 359

Hutchinson, Lucy {b. 1620)

A Puritan Courtship (Memoirs of the Life of Colonel Hutchinson) 179
Huxley, Thomas Henry (1825-1895)

AGameof Chess (Lay Sermons: HI. A Liberal Education) . 470

Irving, Washington (1783-1859)

The Stage Coach ( The Sketch Book : The Stage Coach) . . 354

Dulce Domum (ibid.; Christmas Eve) 355

Little Britain (ibid.: Little Britain) . 356

Poets' Corner (ibid. : Westminster Abbey) .... 357

James, Henry (1843-19T6)

An Archangel Slightly Damaged (The Coxon Fund) . . 514

Philosophy of a Grand Dame (Madame de Motives : Works,
ed. Macmillan, vol xm) . • • 5'5

The Pont duGard(.4 Little Tour in France, chap, xxvi) . 516
James, Willum (1842-1910)

The Will to Believe ( The W til to Believe : Is Life worth Living ?) 511
Jeans, Tames Hopwood (1877-)

The Services of Astronomy (The Nebular Hypothesis and
Modern Cosmogony) . . .... 595

Jefferies, Richard (1848-1887)

The Wheat (Last Essays : Field and Hedgerow) . . 526

Jevons, William Stanley (1835-18S2)

T™eStience(The Principles of Science, Book VI, chap, xxxi) . 486
Johnson, Lionel (1867-1902)

Mannerism in Art (Reviews and Critical Papers : One of our
Conquerors, by Geo. Meredith) 576

Johnson, Samuel (1709-1784)

The Last Idler (Saturday, 5 April 1 760 : The Idler, No. 10^) . 259
The Aviator (if asselas, chap vi) . . 260

Pope and Dryden (Lives of the Poets : Pope) . . . 261

William Collins (ibid. : Collins) . . . . .262

Congregational Music (fourney to the Western Islands • Sky :

ArmideT) . ' 6 3

On his Dictionary (Preface to the Dictionary of the English

Language, 1755) ... .... 264

Letter to Lord Chesterfield (7 Feb. 1755) . . . .265

1078



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Jones, Paul (John Paul) (i 747-1 792)

Naval Strategy (Letter to Vice-Admiral the Comle de Ker saint,



I79i) 3"

Jonson, Ben (1573 ?-i637)
The Dignity of Speech (Timber ; or Discoveries made upon Men

and Matter : De orattonts dtgnttate) . . . 107

His Poverty (ibid.: De Innocenlia) 108

Eloquence (ibid. : Eloquenlia) . . ... 109

Of our Fellow Countryman Shakespeare (ibid. : De Shake-
speare noslrati) . . . . . . . .no

Of Francis Bacon (ibid : Dominus V erulamius) . . .111

Of Public Schools (ibid) 112

Jowett, Benjamin (1817-1893)

Belief in Immortality (Introduction to the Phaedo) . . . 436
Socrates under Sentence of Death hears the Voice of the Laws

of Athens ( Translation of the Crtto) .... 437
The Death of Socrates ( Translation of the Phaedo) . . .438

Last Words on Plato (Introduction to the Laws of Plato) . . 439
Julian, the Ladv, of Norwich (c. 1373)

The Courtesy of our Lord (XVI Revelations of Divtne Love) . 12

Junius ' (? Sir Philip Francis, 1740-1818)

To the Duke of Grafton ( The Letters of Junius, Letter xxxvi) . 309

Keats, John (1795-1821)
The Harp ^Eohan (Letters, 19 Feb 1818) . . .378

Axioms of Poetry (Letter to John Taylor, 27 Feb. 1818) . . 379

Kinglake, Alexander William (1809-^91)
Scarlett's Three Hundred (Balaclava) (Invasion of the

Crimea, sixth ed., Vol V, chap. 1, § vi) . • 4°6

Damascus (Eothen, chap, xxvn) . . • 4°7

Homer and the Child (ibid., chap, iv) 408

Kingsley, Charles (1819-1875)

Amyas on the Cliff (Westward Ho ! chap, xxxn) 4S 1

Salmon Rivers (Tfe Water Babies, chap, in) . • 45 2

Fining a Fox ( Yeast, chap, i) . • • 453

Kingsley, Henry (1830-1876)

The Children at a Wedding (Ravenshoe, chap, lxvi) . . 478

Kipling, Rudyard (1865-)

With the Main Guard (Soldiers Three) 57 s

The Spring Running (The Second Jungle Book) . . • 573

The Great Wall (Puck of Pook's Hill) . . ■ 574

1079



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Knox, John (1505-1572)
Regiment of Women (The First Blast of the Trumpet against
the monstrous Regiment of Women, beginning) ... 44

Lamb, Charles (1775-1834)
The Old Margate Hoy (Last Essays of Eha) . . . 338

Amicus redivivus (tbtd.) 339

Old China (tbtd.) 340

Dream Children (Elta) 341

A Londoner in Grain (Letter to Wtlltam Wordsworth, 30 Jan.

1801) 342

Writing for Antiquity (Letter to Bryan W. Procter, 22 Jan.

1829) 343

Landor, Walter Savage (1775-1864)
Mentem mortalia tangunt (Imaginary Conversations : Aesop

and Rhodope) 344

Rhodope's Father (tbtd.) 345

The Dream of Boccaccio ( The Pentameron) .... 346

Lang, Andrew (1844-1912)
Aucassin's Choice (Aucassin and Nicolete) .... 519
Saint Augustine Robs an Orchard (Adventures among Books :

Confessions of St. Augustine) .... . 520

Izaalc Walton (Essay on Izaak Walton) . . . . 521

Latimer, Hugh (1491-1555)

Decay of the Yeomanry (First Sermon preached before King

Edward VI) 37

Cause and Effect (Last Sermon preached before King

Edward VI) 38

Lecky, William Edward Haktpole (1838-1903)

Party Votes (The Map of Life, chap, ix) .... 494
Leighton, Robert, Archbishop of Glasgow (1611-1684)
Quia omnis caro ut foenum (Commentary on the First Epistle

of St. Peter) .168

Lever, Charles (1806-1872)

With the Galway Hunt (Charles O'Malley, chap, iv) . . 399
Lincoln, Abraham (1809-1865)
Gettysburg (Dedicatory Address at Gettysburg Cemetery,

19 Nov. 1863) 4°9

Locke, John (1632-1704)
On the Teaching of English (Some Thoughts concerning

Education) 197

1080



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Lockhart, John Gibson (1794-1854)

The Death of Sir Walter (Lift of Sir Walter Scott, Ixxxhi) . 374
Lodge, Thomas (1558-1625)

Alinda's Comfort to Perplexed Rosalind (Rosalynde) . . 70
Lomner, William ( ft 1450)

Suffolk dies by Pirates (The Paston Letters : Letter to John
Paston, 5 May 1450) . . .... 24

Lowell, James Russell (1810-1891)

Evening Thoughts after War-Time (Literary Essays : On a



Certain Condescenston in Foreigners) .... 454
Lucas, Edward Verrall (1868-)

The Windmill (0/4 Lam£* /or New) 582

Ludlow, Edmund (1617-1692)
The Lying-in-State of Oliver Cromwell (Memoirs, Sept. 20-

Nov. 23, 1658) . 172

Lvly, John (1554 ?-i6o6)
Two Sisters (Euphues' Glass for Europe : Appendix to Euphues
and his England) . .... .66

Lyttelton, the Hon. Robert Henry (1854-)
Cobden's Over : 1870 (The Badminton Ltbrary : Cricket) 541,"

Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Lord (1800-1859)
Give at Plassey (Historical Essays : Lord Cltve) . . . 382
Warren Hastings (ibid.: Warren Hastings) . . 383

Londonderry (History of England, chap, xn) . . 384
' And Calm of Mind, all Passion spent ' (A Conversation between
Mr. Abraham Cowley and Mr. John Mtlton, touching the

Great Civil War) . . 385

Mackenzie, Compton (1883-)



' The Basket of Roses ' ( The Passionate Elopement, chap, xxix) 598
Macnaghten, Edward, Lord (1830-1913)
Gluckstein v. Barnes : Pleading (Law Reports, [1900] A.C



at pp. 248 and 255) 479

Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner (1822-1888)
Political Parties (Popular Government, Essay II : The Nature

of Democracy) 464

Maitland, Frederic William (1850- 1906)

The Voice of the Majority (Township and Borough) . . 531
Malory, Sir Thomas (fl. 1470)
The Month of May (Le Morte Arthur, Book XVII, chap, xxv) 20
The Maid of Astolat (ibtd., Book XVII, chaps, xix, xx) . . 21

1081



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Malory, Sir Thomas (fl. 1470) — continued
The Last Meeting of Launcelot and Guenever (ibtd., Book XXI,

chaps, ix, x) 22

Sir Ector's Dirge over Launcelot (tbtd., Book XXI, chaps.

xu, xin) 23

Manchester, Sir Henry Montagu, Earl op (1563 7-1642)
The Soul's Excellency (Manchester al Mondo. Contemplalto
Mortts et Immortalttts) 97

Mandeville, Sir John (d. 1372)
Of Paradise ( The Votage and Travaile of Sir John Maundeville,
chap xxxiv) ........ 8

Of the Centre of the Earth (ibid., chap, xxi) ... 9
The Lady of the Land (ibid , chap. iv) . . .10

Noes Schipp (ibid., chap, xvn) . . . . . .11

Mansel, Henry Longueville, Dean of St. Paul's (1820-
1871)

Against Rational Theology (Limits of Religious Thought
Examined, Lecture III) . . ... 460

Markham, Gervase (c. 1568-1637)
' Matched in mouth like bells ' (Country Contentments,
Book I) 105

Marryat, Frederick (1792-1848)
Naval Politeness (Mr. Mtdshtpman Easy, chap, x) . . 372
Weathering the Point (Peter Simple, chap, xv) . . . 373

Masefield, John (1875-)
The Clipper (A Tarpaulin Muster : A Memory) . . . 591
Clewing up the Royals (ibid.: Being Ashore) . . . 592

Melmoth, William (1710-1799)
The Source of the Clitumnus (Translation of Pliny's Letters,
Book VIII, Letter 8) 266

Melville, Herman (1819-1891)

Fayaway (Typee, chap xvni) . . ... 455

Sighting the Whale (Moby Dick, chap, xlvn) . . . 456

Melville, James (1556-1614)
The Armada Castaways in Fife (Diary, 1588) ... 86

Meredith, George (1828-1009)
Diversion on a Penny Whistle (The Ordeal of Richard Feverel,

chap, xix) . 473

Clara Middleton (The Egoist, chap, v) 474
Dawn in the Mountains (The Amazing Marriage, chap, iv) . 475

1082



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

MlDDLETON, CONYERS (1683- 1 7 50)

The Political Character of Cicero (Life of Cicero, Sect. XII) . 243
Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873)

Liberty of the Individual (On Liberty) . . . 400

Miller, Hugh (1802-1856)

His First Day as Quarry-Boy (Old Red Sandstone, chap. 1) . 390
Milton, John (1608-1674)

Against Fugitive and Cloistered Virtue (Areopagitica : a speech
for the liberty of unltcens'd printing in the Parliament of



England) . . 151

The Tyranny of Licensing (ibid.) . ... 152

Milton in Italy (ibid.) . . .... 153

The Profit of Free Speech to a Commonwealth (ibid ) . . 154

' Long Choosing ' (Reason of Church Government, Book II) . 155
Mitford, Mary Russell (1787-1855)

Hannah (Our Village, vol. 1 ad tnit) ..... 368

Montagu, Lady Mary Wortley (1689-1762)
To Mr. Pope, from Adnanople (Letters from the Levant,

Letter 34, 1 April 171 7) 250

Montague, Charles Edward (1867-)
The Faculty of Delight (Disenchantment, chap, xv) . .578

Belated Victory (ibid., chap, xii) 579

Moore, George (1857-)

Esther's Son (Esther Waters, chap, xlix) .... 549
Hail and Farewell ! (Hail and Farewell ! Vale) . . . 550
More, Henry (1614-1687)
The World-Comedy (Divine Dialogues : The Second Dialogue,

XXV) ... 171

More, Sir Thomas (1478-1535)
How far is Honest Mirth lawful (A Dialogue of Comfort against

Tribulation, Tottel's ed , 1553, Book II, chap, i) . .32
His Last Letter to his Daughter Margaret (The Works of Sir

Thomas More, 1557) 33

Morley of Blackburn, John, Viscount (1838-1923)
Eighteenth-Century Verse (Introduction to Wordsworth's

Poetical Works) 49S

Morris, William (1834-1896)

Kelmscott (News from Nowhere, chaps, xxx, xxxi) . . 484
Motley, John Lothrop (1814-1877)
William of Orange (The Rise of the Dutch Republic, Vol. Ill,

Part VI, chap. 7) 427

1083



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Napier, Sir William (1785-1860)
Albuera (History of the War in the Peninsula, Book XII,

chap, vi) 364

Salamanca (tbti., Book XVIII, chap. 111) .... 365
Nash, Thomas (1567-1601)
A Dedication (Christs Teares over Jerusalem) . . 102
A Roman Banqueting House {The Unfortunate Traveller, or
The Life of Jache Wilton) 103

Newbolt, Sir Henry (1862-)

Gardenleigh (The Old Country, I) . 567

Newman, John Henry, Cardinal (1801-1890)
Athens, the Eye of Greece (Historical Sketches) . . 386

The Classics (Grammar o f Assent, chap, iv, § 2) . 387
Definition of a Gentleman (Idea of a University, VIII 10) 388
Leaving Oxford (Apologia pro Vtta Sua, Part VI) . 389

' North, Christopher ' : see Wilson, John

North, Roger (1653-1734)
Judge Jeffries (Life of the Lord Keeper Guilford) . 214
Recreations of a College Don (Life of the Hon. and Rev.

Dr. John North) -215

North, Sir Thomas (153s ?-i6oi ?)
Coriolanus at the Hearth of Aufidius (Plutarch's Lives of the

Noble Grecians and Romans : Life of Coriolanus) . . 52
Cleopatra comes to Antony (ibid. ; Life of Antony) . . 53
Nyren, John (i 764-1837)
Tom Walker (The Young Cricketer's Tutor : The Cricketers of
my Time) . 317

Overbury, Sir Thomas (1581-1613)
A Fair and Happy Milkmaid (Characters) . . .120
A Franklin (ibid.) . 121

Paley, Willhm (1743-1805)

Ingratitude for Common Benefits (Natural Theology,
chap, xxvi) ....... . 3 10

Parkman, Francis (1823-1893)

The Heights of Abraham (Montcalm and Wolfe, chap, xxvii) 468

Pater, Walter (1839-1894)

Monna Lisa (The Renaissance : Notes on Leonardo) . 497

The Religion of Numa (Manns the Epicurean, chap, i) . 498

The Poetry of Ronsard (Gaston de Latour, chap, iii) . . 499

Montaigne (ibUU, chap, iv) . 500
1084



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Patmore, Coventry (1823-1896)

Noble Manners (Principle in Art, &■(. Essay XX : Mme de

Hautefort) 467

Pattison, Mark (1813-1884)

The Instinct of Pilgrimage (Essays : I. Gregory of Tours) . 426
Peacock, Thomas Love (1785-1866)

The Learned Friend (Crotchet Castle, chap. 11) . . 366

Picturesque Gardening (Headlong Hall, chap, iv) . . . 367
Penn, William (1644-1718)

The Comfort of Friends (Fruits of Solitude) . . . . 213
Pepys, Samuel (1633-1703)

A Jaunt into the Country (Diary, T4 July 1667) . . . 198

Amantium irae (tbid., 12 Jan. 1668/9) • • • I 99

Pope, Alexander (1688-1744)

On Translating the Classics (Preface to the Ihad) . 247

An Ancient Country Seat (Letter from Stanton Harcourt to the
Duke of Buckingham [1718?]) 248

A Tragic Pastoral (Letter to Lady Mary Worthy Montagu,

1 Sept. 1718) 249

Powell, Frederick York (1830-1904)

Alfred (Life, Letters, and Writings, Vol. II, Part IV) . . 538

Omar Khayyam (tbtd., Part IX, Verses and Translations) . 539
Prescott, William H. (1796-1859)

The First Sight of Mexico (History of the Conquest of Mexico,

Book III, chap, vm) 380

Prior, Matthew (1664-1721)

The Vicar of Bray and Sir Thomas More (Dialogues of the Dead) 221

R., B.' (fi. 1581)

Cleobis and Bito (Translation of Herodotus) . . . . 6r
Ralegh, Sir Walter ^552 ?-r6i8)
The Last Fight of the Revenge (A Report of the Truth of the
Fight about the Isle of Azores betwtxt the Revenge and an
Armada of the King of Spam) , . 87
Death (A History of the World, Book V, chap, vi, § 12, end) . 88
Letter to his Wife on the Death of his Son (Letter from
St. Christophers, 22 March 1617/18) .... 89
Raleigh, Sir Walter (1861-1922)
The Book of the Courtier (Some Authors : Str Thomas Hoby.
Introduction to The Book of the Courtier, from the Italian
of Count Baldassare Casltgltone : done into English by Sir
Thomas Hoby (Tudor Translations 1900) .... 562

1085



INDEX OF AUTHORS



Raleigh, Sir Walter (1861-1922) — continued
Quae stulta sunt mundi elegit Deus (Some Authors : Don
Quixote. Times Literary Supplement, 27 April 1916) . 563

Reade, Charles (1814-1884)
The Gallows (The Cloister and the Hearth, chap, xxv) . . 428
The English Skylark in Australia (It is Never too Late to Mend,
chap, lxm) ......... 429

Reynolds, Sir Joshua (1723-1792)
The Contemplation of Excellence (Sixth Discourse) . . 284

Richardson, Samuel (1689-1761)
A Filial Victim (Clarissa Harlowe, Letter XVI) . . . 251

Ritchie, Lady : see Thackeray, Anne

Robertson, Frederick William (1816-1853)
The Crystal Palace and Sabbatarianism (Sermons, Series II ■
The Sydenham Palace and the Religious Non-Observance of
the Sabbath) 435

Robertson, William (1721-1793)
The Murder of Rizio (History of Scotland, Book IV) . . 282

Robinson. Ralph (fl. 1551)
Ralph Hythlodaye (Translation of More's Utopia, Book I) . 51

Roper, William (1496-1578)

Sir Thomas More parts from his Daughter Margaret (The
Mirrour of Virtue m Worldly Greatnes, or The Life of Sir
Thomas More, Knight) .... .40

Rosebery, Archibald Philip Primrose, Earl of (1847-)
The Elder and the Younger Pitt (Pitt, chap, xv) . . 525

Ross, Martin : see Somerville, E OE

Rossetti, Dante Gabriel (1828-1882)
Dante's Dream (Early Italian Poets : Dante, Vita Nuova) . 476

Ruskin, John (1819-1900)
A Cathedral Close (The Stones of Venice, chap, iv) . .457
The Two Boyhoods : 1. Giorgione ; 11. Turner (Modern
Painters, Vol. V, Part IX, chap, ix) 45 8
Russell, William Clark (1844-1911)
The Last of the Grosvenor (The Wreck of the Grosvenor,
chap, xxix) ......... 5 22

Rutherford, Mark (William Hale White) (1831-1913)

Injustice (Pages from a Journal) 480

A Londoners Holiday (Mark Rutherford's Deliverance,

chap, ix) 4 Sl

1086



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Saintsbury, George (1845-)
The Death of Mohere {Introduction to A.R. Waller's edition of
the Plays of Mohere) 523

Sanger, ' Lord ' George (1825-1911)
A Fair and a Fire (Seventy Years of a Showman's Z.i/«,chap. xxi) 471

Santa yana, George (1863-)

The Weather in his Soul (Soliloquies in England : 9 The British
Character) ... 570

Rehgio Stoici {Little Essays) . 571

Schreiner, Olive (1859-^920)

Waldo ( The Story of an African Farm, Part II, chap, xi v ad fin ) 556

Scott, Michael (1789-1835)
A King's Ship (Tom Cringle' s Log, chap, vm) . . . 370

Scott, Robert Falcon (1868-^912) and Charles Turley

The Death of Captain Oates (Scott's Last Expedition) 583, i

The End (ibid ) . ... . 583, 11

Scott, Sir Walter (1771-1832)

The Laird evicts the Gipsies (Guy Mannering, chap vm) . 322

The Phoca ( The Antiquary, chap, xxx) . . . 323

A Lost Cause (Redgaunllet, chap. xxni). . . 324

The Trial of Evan Dhu (Waverley, chap lxvm) . . 325

The Banner of England ( The Talisman, chap, xi) . -326

Selden, John (T584-1654)
Pleasure (The Table Talk of John Selden, CIV) . -123
OfaKmg(;W,LXX) . .124

Shadwell, Arthur (c 1821) and R H Lyttelton (1854-)
Oxford v Cambridge .

Septem Contra Camum 1843 (The Oxford and Cambridge

Boat Races from 1829 to i86g, by W. F. Macmichael) . 541, 1
Cobden's Over : 1870 (The Badminton Library • Cricket) 541,"'

Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of ^621-1683)
Character of Henry Hastings (Shaftesbury Papers : Fragment
of Autobiography) . ... 181
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616)
Falstaff and the Hostess (2 Henry IV, II. i) . . .98
Justice Shallow on Death (ibid., ill. li) . . . 99
Before Agincourt (Henry V, IV 1) . . . roo
Hamlet (Hamlet, II. 11) .... . lot
Shaw, George Bernard (r8s6-)
The Artist-Philosopher (Man and Superman : Epistle Dedica-
tory to Arthur Bingham Walkley) 544

1087



INDEX OF AUTHORS



HO.

Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)

Poetry (A Defence of Poetry) 371

Shorthouse, Joseph Henry (1834-1903)
The Pavilion m the Wood (John Inglesani, chap xxx) . . 483

Sidney, Algernon (1622-1683)

The Sanction of Government (A Discourse on Government) . 1 82
Sidney, Sir Philip (1554-1586)

Love in Arcady (Arcadia, Book III) . . . 63

With a Tale he cometh (An Apologie for Poetrie) . 64

Chevy Chase (ibid., Of Lyrtek Poetrie) 65

Smith, Adam (1 723-1 790)

The Rewards of the Professions ( The Wealth of Nations, Book I,

chap, x) 285

Smith, Alexander (1830-1867)

Dreamthorp (Dreamthorp : Essays written i» the Country, I) . 477
Smith, Sir Harry (1787-1860)

The Child of Badajoz (Autobiography, chap vm ) . . . 369
Smith, Sydney (1771-1845)

Noodle's Oration (Benlham on Fallacies) . . . 327

Justice the Root of Patriotism (The Judge that Smites contrary

to the Law) 328

Smollett, Tobias (1721-1771)

Trunnion's Wedding (Peregrine Pickle, Book I, chap, vni) . 283
Somerville, E. (E , and Martin Ross (Miss Violet Martin,
1862-1915)

An Outpost of Ireland (Some Irish Yesterdays : An Outpost of

Ireland) 568

South, Robert (1634-1716)



Hypocrites (Sermon : On the Mischievous Influence of Words
and Names falsely applied) 202

Southey, Robert (1774-1843)

Nelson's Departure from Portsmouth (Life of Lord Nelson,

chap, ix) ... ... 333

The Mourning for Nelson (ibid., end) . . . 334

Spedding, James (1808-1881)

Bacon and Bribery (The Life and Letters of Francis Bacon,
Book VII, chap, vi, § 1) . . . . . 402

Sprat, Thomas, Bishop of Rochester (1635-1713)
The Philosophy of the Primitive Church (The History of the

Royal Society, Parti, sect. 7) 204

The Plague (ibid., Part I, sect. 21) 205

1088



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Steele, Sir Richard (1672-1729)

His First Grief (The Taller, No. 181) 236

Mr. BickerstafI visits a Friend (tbtd.. No 95) . . 237

A Dream after reading in Bed (ibid , No. 8) . . 238

A True Magistrate (tbtd., No. 14). . . 239
Satire (ibid., No 242) . ..... 240

Sterne, Laurence (1713-1768)
Consolations of Philosophy (Tristram Shandy, B00V. V,chap.in) 269
Trim's Hat (tbtd., Book V, chap, vn) . . . 270

Death of Le Fever (»'Wi., Book VI, chap, x) . . . .271
Nannette (ibid., Book VII, chap, xlin) . . . -272
The Monk (A Sentimental Journey : Calais) .... 273

Stevenson, Robert Louis (1850-1894)

The English Admirals (Vtrginibus Puertsque : The English

Admirals) 533

Children (tbtd. : Child's Play) ...... 534

Night among the Pines (Travels with a Donkey : A Night
among the Pines) ... .... 535

A Midnight Flitting ( The Master of Ballantrae, chap, vin) . 536
Kirstie(WWr of Hermtston, chap, vm) 537

Stillingfleet, Edward, Bishop of Worcester (1635-1699)
London's Judgement by Fire (A Sermon after the Great Fire
of London) . . .... 206

Strachey, Giles Lytton (1880-)
The Loss of the Prince Consort (Queen Victoria, chap, vn) . 596
The Passing of Victoria (ibid., chap, x ad fin.) . . . 597

Sumner of Ibstone, John Andrew Hamilton, Lord (1859-)
Bowman v. Secular Society Ltd : Judgement (Law Reports,
[i9i7]A Cat p. 466) 557

Surtees, Robert Smith (1803-1864)

Mr. Jorrocks, M.F.H., arrives at Handley Cross (Handley

Cross, chap, ix) . . . 391

A Morning Find (tbtd., chap, h) ... . 392

Swift, Jonathan (1667-1745)
Stella goes Riding (Journal to Stella, Letter 25) . . . 223
A Standard for English (Letter Dedicatory to the Earl of Oxford) 224
Gulliver captures the Fleet of Blefuscu (A Voyage to Ltltiput,

chap, v) 225

The Academy of Projectors (A Voyage to Laputa, chap, v) . 226
A Dedication to Prince Posterity (The Tale of a Tub) . .227

Swinburne, Algernon Charles (1837-1909)

Philip the Bastard (A Study of Shakespeare : Second Period) . 492
Byron (Introduction to Selection from Works of Lord Byron) . 493

1089



INDEX OF AUTHORS



NO.

Synge, John Millington (1871-1909)
Riders to the Sea (Dramatic Works : Riders to the Sea) . . 586



Taylor, Jane (1783-1824)
A Young Lady's Education (Contributions ofQ.Q.) . . 353

Taylor, Jeremy, Bishop of Down and Connor (1613-1667)

Against Bitterness of Zeal (Sermons) 163

Viastj, Galilsee ! (Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Lord
Primate) . .164



How amiable are Thy tabernacles (Polemical Discourses) . 1 65

Marriage (Sermons : The Marriage Ring) . . . 166

The Husband (ibid.) . 167

Temple, Sir William (1628-1699)

Of Poetry (Essays : Of Poetry) . .... 188

On his Retirement from Public Life (Memoirs, end) . . 189

On Gardens (Upon the Gardens of Epicurus ; or, of Gardening) 190

Thackeray, Anne (Lady Ritchie) (1838-1919)

The Children's Hour (Old Kensington, chap, lv ad fin.) . . 496

Thackeray, William Makepeace (T811-1863)
Sir Pitt Crawley in Town (Vanity Fair, chap, vii) . .415

Waterloo (tbtd., chap, xxxii) .... . 416

Mother and Daughter (The History of Henry Esmond, Book II,

chaps, vi, vn) ... ... 417

Pulvis et Umbra (ibid., Book III, chap vi) . . 418

' The Steps of a Good Man ' (TheNcwcomcs, chap, lxxv) . 419

Chur in the Grisons (Roundabout Papers ; On a Lazy Idle Boy) 420

Thompson, Francis (1859-1907)

Shelley (Prose Works : Shelley) 552

Thoreau, Henry David (181 7-1862)

The Lure of the River (A Week on the Concord) . . . 440

The Shipwreck (Cape Cod) 44 1

Chanticleer (Essays : Walking) . . ■ 442

Autumn Sunset (tbtd.) 443

Thornley, George (b 1614)
The Grasshopper (Translation of Longus's Daphnis and Chloe,

Book I, sect. 26) 169

The Nightingales (ibid , Book III, sect. 12) . . • .170

Tillotson, John, Archbishop of Canterbury (1630-1694)

OfFeasts(#42«tton*in£!/<:byDr.Birch) . . . .192

Traherne, Thomas (i636?-i674)
The Heir of All Things (Centuries of Meditations, First Century,

29-30) . . ..... 208

1090



TITLES AND SOURCES



NO.

Traherne, Thomas (1636 ?-i 674) — continued

A Child's Vision of the World (ibid , Third Century, 1-3) . 209
Love a Trinity (ibid , Second Century, 40) . . .210

Traill, Henry Duff (1842-1900)

Plato and Landor in Elysium (The New Luctan ■ Plato and
Landor) . .... 510

Trevelyan, George Macaulay (1876-)

Garibaldi (Garibaldi's Defence of the Roman Republic, chap. 1) 593
Garibaldi in the Assembly (ibid, chap xi) . 594

Trevisa, John (1326-1402)
This Realm, this England (Translation of Higden's Poly-

chronicon, chap xvi) . .1
The Mettle of your Pasture (ibid , chap, lx) . . 2

The Thirteenth-Century Maiden (Translation of Bartholomew
de Glanville's De Proprietattbus Rerum, Book VI, chap, vn) . 3

Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)

The Plumstead Foxes (TkeLastCkronicleof Barset, chap xxxm) 431
Mr Harding's Funeral (ibid , chap lxxxn) . . 432

Turley, Charles : see Scott, Robert Falcon

Tyndale, William (1496 '-1536)
A Vision of Judgement (5/ Matthew xx\i 31-46 Translation
of the New Testament, 1535) 39

Urquhart, Sir Thomas (1611-1660)

Fay ce que Voudras (Translation of Rabelais's Gargantua and

Panlagruel, Book I, chap lvn) . 161

Gargantua to his Son, at Paris University (tbid., Book II,

chap, vm) . 162

Vaughan, Henry (1622-1695)

Finis rerum (The Mount of Olives Man in Darkness) . 180

Walkley, Arthur Bingham (1855-)
The National Gallery (Still More Prejudice • The National
Gallery as Experience) . . 542

Walpole, Horace (1717-1797)
Strawberry Hill (Letter to H S Conway, 8 June 1747) 276
Funeral of George II (Letter to George Montagu, 13 Nov 1760). 277
Walton, Izaak (1593-1682)

A Milkmaid's Song (The Compleat Angler, chap, iv) . . 131
George Herbert's Walks to Salisbury (Life of George Herbert) . 132
Portrait of John Donne (Life of John Donne) . . . -133
The Judicious Hooker makes an Injudicious Marriage (Life of

Richard Hooker) . ... . 134

Sir Henry Wotton (Life of Sir Henry Wotlon) . . 135

1091



INDEX OF AUTHORS

NO.

Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of (1769-1852)
Chaplains for the fumy (Dispatches : To Lteut.-General Calvert) 318

Wells, Herbert George (1866-)
The Potwell Inn (The History of Mr. Polly, chap, ix) . . 575

Whiblry, Charles (1850-)

Rabelais (Literary Portraits, VII) 558

George Brummel (Introduction to The Pageantry of Life) . . 559

Whistler, James Abbott McNeill (1834-1903)

Nature and Art (The Gentle Art of Making Enemies : Mr.

Whistler's 'Ten o'Clock') 485

White, Gilbert (1720-1793)

The Red Deer of Wolmer Forest (The Natural History of
Selborne, Letters VI and VII) 278

The Bat (ibid., Letter XI) 279

The Sussex Downs (ibid., Letter LVI) 280

Rooks (ibid., Letter CIII) 281

White, James (1775-1820)

Davy to Justice Shallow (Falstaff Letters, 34) . . . 347
White, William Hale : see Rutherford, Mark
Whitman, Walt (1819-1892)

Starlight, and Carlyle Dying (Specimen Days in America) . 459
Wilde, Oscar (1856-1900)

The Critic as Artist (Intentions) 543

Wilson, John (' Christopher North ') (1785-1854)

Our Country (Nodes Ambrosianae, No. LXXI, Blackwood's

Magazine, 1835) 360

Wilson, Thomas (1525 ?-is8i)

'Inkhorn Terms ' (The Arte of Rhelorique) .... 50

Wotton, Sir Henry (1568-1639)
To Mr. John Milton (Letter concerning ' Comus ' and advice to
Milton, 13 April 1638) .... . . 106

Wordsworth, Dorothy (1771-1855)
The Beggars (Journal, Tuesday, 10th June 1800) . 321, /
Friday, 14th May 1802 (ibid.) 3 21 . «

Wordsworth, William (1770-1850)
Sinews of Patriotism (i. The Convention of Cintra. ii. Letter

to Captain Pasley, 28 March 1811) 3*9

The Poet (Preface to Lyrical Ballads) 3 20

Wtcliffe, John (13*4 ?-i384)
The Prodigal Son (Sermons, No. 159 : Tlie Saturday Gospel in

the Seeunde Wek* in Len'e) 4

1092
